Published by:

The General Secretariat of the National Council for Sustainable Development/Ministry of  2020 the General Secretariat of the National Council for Sustainable Development/Ministry of Environment, the Kingdom of Cambodia. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means without the permission of the copyright holder.

Contact Information:

The General Secretariat of the National Council for Sustainable Development/Ministry of Environment Morodok Techo Building (Lot 503), Tonle Bassac, Chamkarmon, Phnom Penh, The International community reached a truly historic milestone with the Paris climate 2, preferably to 1.5 degrees Celsius, compared to pre-industrial levels, to significantly reduce the risks and impacts of climate change.

Cambodia has always been a strong supporter of multilateral action on climate change. As a country particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, we understand the urgency of ambitious climate action and aim to lead by example, in line with our capacities and responsibilities under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).

The updated NDC has been improved in several important ways. First, coverage has increased to include climate change mitigation targets in the agricultural and waste sectors, and also with more detailed actions in key sub-sectors, such as energy efficiency.

It includes a stronger set of adaptation actions, which remain the top priority for Cambodia. Second, we have set an ambitious target in the Forestry and Land Use sector (FOLU) for halving the deforestation rate by 2030, in line with our REDD+ strategy. In other sectors, we have increased our level of ambition for Green House Gases (GHG) emissions reduction compared to our initial NDC in 2015. Third, the updated NDC pays particular attention to gender and vulnerable groups, in order to ensure that our adaptation and mitigation actions contribute to a more inclusive society. Finally, a reporting and verification (MRV), so that we are able generate credible evidence on progress made and on challenges encountered. This will help us to keep refining our policies so that we not only meet our NDC commitments, but also our climate change targets under the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

I would like to take this opportunity to thank all our partners who have contributed to the development of this document, both at the sectoral and national levels. I would like to thank in particular the Cambodia Climate Change Alliance programme (funded by the European Union, Sweden, and UNDP), the World Bank, the NDC Partnership, and other Development Partners for their support and cooperation for this process. As Cambodia is committed to doing her part to address the global challenge of climate change, we look forward to working with all our partners to address our remaining needs in financing, capacity development, and technology transfers. This cooperation and support will be crucial to achieve the ambitious vision set out in this document.

The International community reached a truly historic milestone with the Paris climate agreement in 2015. Together, we agreed to limit global warming to well below 2, preferably to 1.5 degrees Celsius, compared to pre-industrial levels, to significantly reduce the risks and impacts of climate change.

The Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) is committed to combating climate change and accelerating the transition to a climate-resilient, low-carbon sustainable mode of development. The RGC has supported global efforts against climate change by being a Party to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) since 1996.

Cambodia adopted and ratified the Paris Agreement by which the country submitted an ambitious Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), which showcased her progress in climate policy, and put forward mitigation targets and adaptation actions consistent with her national circumstances. The country is now proud to submit an updated NDC, which strengthens her aspirations towards a cleaner and greener economy and fulfils her obligations to better the lives of her citizens, in particular the vulnerable. The focus of Cambodias development is on reducing poverty and ensuring stable economic growth, with the aim of achieving upper-middle income status by 2030, as enshrined in the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP). Cambodia is highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change, and adaptation features prominently in the NDC. At the same time, Cambodias total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are increasing as the country develops.

The country has already made remarkable progress in terms of climate change policy, particularly in mainstreaming climate change into national and sub-national planning. The RGC has developed and continues to implement the Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014  2023 (CCCSP) (2013) and each relevant ministry has developed associated action plans (CCAPs). Cambodias first Biennial Update Report (BUR) was submitted in August Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Framework for the response to Climate Change has also been developed and regular climate public expenditure reviews have been undertaken.

Cambodia has also improved the tracking of climate finance in her Official Development Assistance (ODA) database, among many other initiatives.

This section contains an illustration of Cambodias Business as Usual (BAU), the proposed mitigation targets and measures to support the achievement of them.

In the BAU scenario, overall GHG emissions in 2030 without the FOLU are expected to rise by up to 79 million tCO2e/year, while overall GHG emissions with the FOLU are expected to increase to 155 million tCO2e/year.

The FOLU sector will generate the highest overall BAU emissions in 2030, with 49.2% of the forecasted BAU emissions in 2030. This would be followed by the energy sector with 22.2%, the agricultural sector with 17.5%, and Industry (IPPU) with 9.0%.

Using the information provided by relevant ministries on the mitigation measures, activities and assumptions, NDC scenarios for energy generation, transport, waste, industry, agriculture, and the building sectors were modelled using PROSPECT+, while NDC scenarios for the FOLU sector were developed using the EX-ACT tool.

The estimated emission reductions of the NDC scenario are shown below.

The estimated emissions reduction with the FOLU by 2030 under the NDC scenario will be approximately 64.6 million tCO2e/year (41.7% reduction of which 59.1% is from the FOLU).

Mitigation actions were identified from information provided by the relevant ministries mitigation sectors: energy, waste, industry, transport, agriculture, building, and the FOLU.

Adaptation features strongly in Cambodias initial NDC and is equally important in this updated NDC due to the countrys continued high vulnerability to climate change.

Based on several international climate change indices, Cambodia is considered one of the most vulnerable countries to the impacts of climate change. The country is particularly vulnerable to floods, droughts, windstorms, and seawater intrusion. Climate change may reduce the countrys annual average GDP growth by 6.6% and absolute GDP by 0.4% in 2020, by 2.5% in 2030, and up to 9.8% in 2050. This may delay reaching upper middle-income status by one year. Accordingly, Cambodia has begun working to develop a National Adaptation Plan (NAP) based on the National Adaptation Programme of Actions (NAPA).

Cambodias vulnerability is characterised by frequent floods and irregular rainfall, coupled with an agrarian based economy, limited human and financial resources, insufficient physical infrastructure, and limited access to technologies. Socio-economic status, location, access to resources and technologies all influence Cambodians ability to manage climate impacts. Different social groups experience climate vulnerability differently, and women, children, the disabled, the elderly and other socially marginalised groups are often hit harder.

For the development of the SNC, climate change impacts and vulnerability were assessed for the most vulnerable sectors including agriculture and water resources, forestry, coastal zones, and human health.

As with mitigation, all Line Ministries with adaptation relevance submitted their proposed priority actions (86 in total). The focus sectors, in line with the vulnerability of the country, are:

Infrastructure  including roads, buildings and urban land use planning (15 actions)  Water resources (6 actions).

In addition, a number of Ministries play an enabling role to facilitate the implementation of actions within the NDC. Such actions can be divided into:

The initial NDC was developed quickly which made conducting far-reaching consultations challenging. As such, some crucial areas of climate change policy and implementation were not adequately analysed, namely Gender; Youth involvement; and engagement with the Private sector.

Regarding Gender, all sectors, especially waste and energy, are key to mitigation. For adaptation, agriculture, forestry, and fisheries sectors are particularly important, and all ministries provided targets for womens participation. Gender-balanced training and awareness material and the promotion of women champions are key. Most Ministries included gender disaggregated targets of each action across these areas.

Regarding youth involvement, in mitigation there is a focus on energy, industry and transport. In adaptation, youth are especially involved in energy, industry, and transport. Also, beyond direct engagement in these sectors, children and youth play a critical role in the development, implementation, monitoring, and enforcement of climate actions across sectors.

With regard to private sector engagement, Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) are key to the industry, waste, and energy sectors. While the private sector is less prevalent than in mitigation sectors, there are strong opportunities, especially for smallholder farmers and foresters. In general, the private sector can provide inputs, knowledge, and finance. It is also important to highlight an additional area related to Indigenous People. The Cambodian Constitution recognises that all Khmer citizens (including all indigenous people under the National Policy on the Development of Indigenous Peoples) are equal before the law regardless of race, colour, national origin, etc. During the NDC implementation and particularly for mitigation measures in the FOLU, the RGC will seek to promote the rights of indigenous people, specifically concerning land ownership.

The Department of Climate Change (DCC) of the General Secretariat of the National Council implementation and the identification of gaps, as well as the development of the corresponding NDC Roadmap and Stakeholder Engagement Plan. This ensured that the country was able to review her NDC targets by the COP 26 meeting and is expected to achieve her stated contributions by 2030.

The NDC update process was initiated with the relevant line ministries in March 2020 and included contributions from a number of development partner experts. A private sector event included the participation of stakeholders from a range of different sectors, and local communities and indigenous peoples were engaged in the process. Every effort was made to conduct consultations in a gender responsive way.

Cambodias NDC places strong focus on the CCCSP 2014-23 (2013) and the related Sectoral Action Plans for its implementation. The following guidelines are also crucial: Cambodias Sustainable Development Goals (CSDGs) 2016-30 (2018); The National Strategic Plan on development); The Circular Economy Strategy and Action Plan (also under development) sectoral policies; and the related strategies detailed in the Annex.

An illustration of the roles and responsibilities of each stakeholder with regard to the NDC implementation is below.

-Provision of support -Engagement in policy and provision of information to the GSSD -NDC implementation -Engagement in policy and provision of information to the GSSD This section presents an overview of the means of implementation across finance, capacity building, and technology.

Despite ongoing efforts, financial demands remain high. Future resource mobilisation will look towards a reasonable mix of national and international funds, in addition to market mechanisms, where appropriate, and in line with progress on Article 6 of the Paris Agreement. The total funding required for all mitigation actions is over US $ 5.8 billion. The FOLU, waste, and energy sector actions require the highest funding. Total funding required for all adaptation actions is just over US $ 2 billion. Infrastructure, water, and agriculture require the highest funding.

The NDC review identified the need for capacity building for the NDC implementation, especially for the NCSD/DCC, CCTWG, and sectoral (and sub-national) TWGs. In addition, each ministry submitted its own capacity building needs, which will require a strong international support.

Cambodia has developed a technology needs assessment for adaptation and mitigation, and technology needs also feature prominently in the sectoral climate change action plans. However, these are largely outdated so each ministry provided an action by action indication of technology needs and availability.

Cambodia is putting significant emphasis on the development of an integrated and detailed MRV system that is also aimed at achieving implementation of the NDC. It will be made up of the following components (mitigation, adaptation, GHG inventory, support received, and the support needed).

The system will detail how monitoring will occur and how data will be managed, aggregated, and translated into reports, with a particular focus on gender and vulnerable groups. A simple, accessible online NDC tracking system will be developed and the tool will be made accessible through the website.

Information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding The NDC contains a summary in table format of such information.

Despite being a least developed country with an eighth of the per capita emissions when compared to the global average, with this NDC Cambodia is proposing an ambitious set of sectoral reduction targets and structured and comprehensive adaptation actions.

Climate change mitigation and adaptation will be crucial not only to achieve SDG 13 on Climate Action, but a range of other SDGs and the Paris Agreement, given the cross-cutting nature of climate change. SDG 13 has significant implications on the achievement of other key priorities of each country, such as poverty reduction, food security, gender equality, water and sanitation, energy access, reduced inequalities, sustainable cities, and sustainable land use and ecosystems1. As part of the Cambodia NDC revision process, an analysis on how the NDCs can impact the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) was carried out. Each mitigation measure and adaptation action has been screened against the attainment of the SDGs.

The Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) is committed to combating climate change and accelerating the transition to a climate-resilient, low-carbon sustainable mode of development. The RGC has supported global efforts against climate change by being a Party to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) since 1996.

Cambodia adopted and ratified the Paris Agreement by which the country submitted an ambitious Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) which showcased progress in climate policy and put forward mitigation targets and adaptation actions consistent with the national circumstances.

The country is now proud to submit an updated NDC which strengthens her aspirations towards a cleaner and greener economy and fulfils her obligations to better the lives of her citizens, in particular the most vulnerable people.

Cambodias development focus is on poverty reduction and stable economic growth, to support the countrys efforts to become an upper middle-income nation by 2030. To meet this aim, the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) prioritises: (1) investment in rural areas; (2) decentralisation of national governance; and (3) further integration into the ASEAN region and the wider international community.

Cambodia is highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change, and adaptation features prominently in the NDC. The sectors most affected are agriculture, infrastructure, forestry, human health, and coastal zone areas are particularly vulnerable to sea level rises and intrusion. According to the Global Climate Risk Index, Cambodia was ranked as the 12th most climate risk-prone country globally, showing the high-level of vulnerability to extreme weather events. However, beyond extreme weather events, climate change also results in slow-onset events that can have significant negative implications for Cambodia and her citizens, particularly the most vulnerable people. Climate change acts as a threat multiplier and its impacts are particularly damaging given the limited adaptive capacity of Cambodias population due to socioeconomic conditions such as poverty, malnutrition, agricultural dependence, settlements in flood-prone areas, and public health2.

At the same time, Cambodias total annual net greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions rising due to development activities. Hence, there is a need to prioritise developing Cambodias economy and improving the socioeconomic wellbeing of its population, including the most vulnerable people, through low-carbon pathways.

Cambodia has already made remarkable progress in climate change policy, especially in mainstreaming climate change into national and sub-national planning. The Cambodian Governments coordinated strategy to tackle climate change is focused on adaptation, with a gradual increase in mitigation actions aligned with economic development goals. Cambodia has developed and continues to implement the Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014  2023 (CCCSP) (2015) and each relevant ministry has developed associated action plans (CCAPs). The country submitted her Intended NDC to the UNFCCC ahead of the Conference of Parties (COP) 21 in Paris in 2015 and then ratified the NDC in 2016. Cambodias first Biennial Update Report (BUR) was also completed and submitted in August 2020 and the Third National Communication (TNC) work is underway. Further submissions of the NDCs will enable the Cambodian Government to progress in the fulfilment of the Paris Climate Agreement. The successful implementation of Cambodias NDC will, however, rely on adequately accessing and mobilising domestic and international climate finance.

Cambodia has also made strong progress in developing and implementing monitoring and evaluation (M&E) frameworks, including for finance. The country has produced regular climate public expenditure reviews and has improved tracking of climate finance in her Official Development Assistance (ODA) database. The National M&E Framework for Climate Change Response has also been developed and future adaptation and mitigation efforts are anticipated to be supported by international donors and multilateral funds, as well as national contributions.

Accordingly, the document is structured as follows:

Section 4 includes cross-cutting areas of gender, youth involvement, and private  In Section 8, the relationship between Cambodias NDC and sustainable development is presented.

This section contains an illustration of Cambodias Business as Usual (BAU), the proposed mitigation targets and measures to support the achievement of these targets.

BAU scenarios were developed covering energy generation, transport, waste, industry, agriculture, building, and the forestry and other land use (FOLU) sectors. The BAU scenarios for electricity, transport, buildings, cement, other industries (excluding cement), agriculture, Technical Secretariat (RTS).

Overall GHG emissions (including the FOLU) were validated using GHG emission values in the latest Biennial Update Report (BUR, 2020), which consists of GHG emissions from 2010 - 2016 for most of the sectors (except the FOLU). As shown in Table 1, the UNFCCC sectors were generated by combining certain PROSPECTS+ sectors.

For each sector, a BAU scenario was developed by extrapolating past emission trends, interpolating available data, and using relevant influential factors (GDP, population, and the forestry growth rate) to fill in missing data in a sequence.

3 We have kept Agriculture and the FOLU sectors separately in order to make the decision-making process easier for the government. However, we can merge it if needed and present as the AFOLU sector.

According to Figure 1, overall GHG emissions in 2030 without the FOLU would rise by up to 79 million tCO2e/year, while overall GHG emissions with the FOLU are expected to increase to 155 million tCO2e/year.

Figure 2 illustrates the forecast emissions for mitigation sectors under the BAU Scenario (including the FOLU Scenario) until 2030. The lower line (in grey) shows the BAU emissions of the waste sector, which has the lowest BAU emissions among all sectors, while most upper line (in green) shows the cumulative BAU emissions of all sectors.

Figure 3 illustrates the forecast of emissions for each mitigation sector (excluding the FOLU) up to 2030.

Figure 3 The BAU GHG emission projections for mitigation sectors (without the FOLU) Waste + Industry(IPPU)+ Agriculture Waste + Industry(IPPU)+ Agriculture + Energy According to Figure 2 and Figure 3, the BAU scenarios for all sectors are steadily increasing.

The highest emissions contributor is the FOLU sector, followed by the agricultural sector. The share of emission contributions of the sectors in 2016 and 2030 are illustrated in Figure 4, Figure 5, Figure 6, and Figure 7 below.

The FOLU sector would contribute the highest overall BAU emissions in 2030, contributing up to 49.2% of the BAU emissions. This would be followed by the energy sector with 22.2%, the agricultural sector with 17.5%, and industry (IPPU) with 9.0%. The FOLU, energy, agriculture, and industry (IPPU) sectors would be responsible for more than 95% of the estimated BAU emissions in 2030.

When considering the BAU emissions without the FOLU, the energy sector would contribute the highest overall BAU emissions in 2030. This would be followed by the agriculture sector The FOLU sector would contribute the highest overall BAU emissions in 2016 also, contributing up to 61% of the forecasted BAU emissions. This would be followed by the agricultural sector with 16.9%, the energy sector with 12%, and industry (IPPU) with 7.9%. The FOLU, agriculture, energy, and industry (IPPU) sectors were responsible for more than 95% of BAU emissions in 2016.

When considering the BAU emissions without the FOLU, the agricultural sector would contribute the highest overall BAU emissions in 2016. This would be followed by the energy sector with 30.8%, the industrial sector (IPPU) with 20.3%, and the waste sector with 5.5%.

Using the information provided by relevant ministries on the mitigation measures, activities, and assumptions, NDC scenarios for energy, transport, waste, industry, agriculture, and the building sectors were modelled using PROSPECT+, while the NDC scenarios for the FOLU sector were developed using the EX-ACT tool.

The majority of targets identified below are conditional on the international support. Cambodia also implements mitigation actions under the countrys sustainable development programme. The start and end year of each project were considered as 2020 and 2030, respectively.

The FOLU NDC Scenario: Reduce 50% of historical emissions by 2030 (REDD+ programme);

Climate Change. The main assumption of the calculation was to reduce the 50% historical emission from the forest sector (76.3 million tCO2e) by 2030 (38.1 million tCO2e) with an average annual reduction of 21 million tCO2e/year. (Further information on the NDC scenarios is provided in Appendix 6). The estimated emission reductions under the NDC scenario are shown in Figure 8 below.

As per Figure 8, the estimated emission reductions with the FOLU by 2030 under the NDC scenario will be approximately 64.6 million tCO2e/year (41.7% reduction, of which 59.1% is from the FOLU).

The share of distribution of the planned emission reductions under the NDC scenario among the sectors is indicated in Figure 9 below.

Table 6 Sectoral share and absolute number of GHG emission reduction under NDC scenario The emissions reduction of 64.6 million tCO2e/year is expected by 2030. This is a 41.7 % reduction compared with the BAU case.

The FOLU is expected to provide the major share of 59.1% emission reduction by 2030. Other sectors like energy (21.3%), agriculture (9.6%), industry (IPPU) (9.1%), and waste (0.9%) are also expected to contribute significantly.

This approach will have a better resilience to failure in mitigation activities. One disadvantage of the involvement of many sectors could be the need for more experts in many fields. However, this could be considered as an opportunity to develop or strengthen Cambodias capacity.

Mitigating emissions from the electricity sector will be directed mainly on the renewable energy power generation. There will be barriers imposed by the availability and the absorption capacity of the grid, which would have to be addressed for the achievement of targets. Mitigating the transport sector emissions would require policy instruments and carbon pricing instruments to promote low emission transport modes. Social acceptance would depend on the chosen approaches, public awareness-raising activities, and the instruments used.

The Department of Climate Change (DCC) of the GSSD, supported by the Cambodia Climate Change Alliance (CCCA), has been coordinating stakeholder engagement and collecting submissions from line ministries on priorities for the NDC revision for both mitigation and adaptation activities. The template used to ensure comparability across mitigation actions is the following.

Mitigation actions were identified from the NDC related information provided by the relevant ministries (MAFF, MISTI, MLMUPC, MME, MoE, MOEYs, MoT, MPWT, and NCDD). These projects were filtered and a list of mitigation projects was prepared. The mitigation projects are distributed among seven sectors: energy, waste, industry, transport, agriculture, building, and the FOLU. Table 8 shows the identified list.

1 Promote sustainable energy practices in manufacturing Garments: 2.291 MtCO2e, 55% by 2030 Bricks: 1.799 MtCO2e, 44% by 2030 Food and Beverage: 1.043 MtCO2e, 25% by 2030 Urban Planning Tools for Climate Change Mitigation and the urban planning solution in three sub cities 3 Application of electrical equipments labelling & MEPS (Lighting, Cooling & Equipment) Reduce 1.2 TWh (29.7%) of electricity use in 2030 4 Improvement of process performance of EE by establishment of energy management in buildings/industries Voluntary scheme for other companies, especially for SMEs to reduce 10% in 2030 5 Public awareness campaigns, DTEBP-EE info centres Reduce 2% of energy consumption in 2030 6 Building codes and enforcement/certification for new buildings and those undergoing major renovation Reduce 10% of electricity consumption in 2030 7 Introduction of efficient electrical motors and boilers Reduce 2.3% of current electricity consumption in 2030 8 Improve sustainability of charcoal production through enforcement of regulations 9 Roadmap study on Integration of RE (Renewable Energy) resources. 25 % of the renewable energy in the energy mix (solar, wind, hydro, biomass) by 2030 10 New sanitary landfills with LFG extraction and LFG extraction at the Dangkor Landfill Increase the share of waste disposed at sanitary landfills with LFG extraction from 0% in 2020 to 50% by 2030 and extract LFG from the Dangkor Landfill 11 Composting of biodegradable organic fraction of MSW supplemented with separation of organic waste (at source). If 10% of all MSW generated is composted by 2030 12 Production of Refuse-Derived Fuel (RDF) from either a) fresh MSW or b) old MSW mined from the Dangkor landfill. GHG ER from RDF + anaerobic digestion up to 0.2 MtCO2e/year 13 Implementation of National 3R strategy MoE Waste -MSW 14 Enhance maintenance and inspection of vehicle (Piloting maintenance and emission inspections of vehicles) 30 vehicle inspection centres in operation by 2030 16 Reducing GHG emission though off grid street lightening of rural municipality 10 Sangkat of Senmonorom municipality, Kep municipality, and Preah municipality integration of climate change into financial management, institutional arrangement and policy reform by 2028.

17 Bio-digesters construction (85% reduction compared to 2000) (Small size (2-3-4m3) 18 Bio-digesters construction (85% reduction compared to 2000) Medium size(6-8-10m3) 19 Bio-digesters construction (85% reduction compared to 2000) Large size(>10m3) 20 Centralized recycling facility for industrial waste from the garment sector Reduce 0.11MtCO2e from 2021-2030at an average of 0.01 MtCO2e/year 22 Toward Battambang city to green city 5 Sangkat of Battambang municipality integration of green city by 2025 Monitor air quality at 105 factories annually and provide permit letter for emission to the air to 90 factories. 90% of factories to be licensed.

25 Increasing the effectiveness and sustainability of agricultural land management techniques (Conservation Agriculture) 26 Organic input agriculture and bio-slurry; and deep placement fertilizer technology 10 Provinces by 2030 28 Promote manure management through compost making process to reduce carbon emission 25 provinces and cities by 2030 29 Better management of industrial wastewater in the food & beverage sector 5-10% of total CH4 emissions 30 Implementation of National Cooling Action Plan Enhanced MEPS and F-gas transition for room air conditioners and residential refrigerators targeting the new & existing equipment stock in the country.

31 Inclusion of performance requirements of Passive Cooling Systems in Building Energy Code of Cambodia 20% of the newly constructed buildings will comply with Building Energy Code 32 Implementation of passive cooling measures in the cities (addressing urban heat island effect [UHIE]), public buildings and commercial buildings.

- cities (Phnom Penh and Siem Reap) analysed for mitigating UHIE and projects are implemented - 2% of the existing public and commercial buildings are retrofitted with passive cooling measures (Project level emissions were submitted by the line ministries listed under Appendix 5).

Table 8 The FOLU targets (detailed list of actions are listed in the Appendix 5) Activities:

Adaptation features strongly in Cambodias initial NDC and is equally important in this updated NDC, due to the countrys continued high vulnerability to climate change.

According to several international climate change indices, Cambodia is one of the most vulnerable countries to the adverse impacts of climate change4. The Global Climate Risk Index (19992018)5 placed Cambodia at 12th place among the most vulnerable countries vulnerability, categorised Cambodia as among the very high impacted countries. Rising temperatures are likely to lead to increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events in a fragile socio-economic context. The country's climate vulnerability results in loss and damage to human life, livelihoods, and the national economy, as well as the degradation of her natural resources. The country is particularly vulnerable to floods, droughts, windstorms, and seawater intrusion. According to a series of vulnerability assessments carried out in 20167, 17.5% of Cambodias communes were highly vulnerable climate change hazards.

Notably, recent research8 indicates that without climate change, the real GDP will grow at an average of 6.9% per year from 2017 to 2050, achieving Upper Middle-Income Country (UMIC) status in 2035. With climate change, the headline projections use the mid-climate change scenario and a mid-adaptation scenario that is equivalent to current levels of adaptation. Climate change reduces average GDP growth to 6.6% and absolute GDP by 0.4% in 2020, 2.5% in 2030, and 9.8% in 2050. As a result, the UMIC status may be delayed by one year. Accordingly, Cambodia has begun developing her National Adaptation Plan (NAP). The NAP process builds on work carried out as part of the National Adaptation Plan of Action (NAPA), the Second National Communication (SNC) and the CCSAP, among others. The NAP identifies climate change impacts, vulnerability, and adaptation actions for Cambodia.

Cambodias vulnerability is characterised by frequent flooding and irregular rainfall, coupled with an agrarian based economy, limited human and financial resources, insufficient physical infrastructure, and limited access to technologies. Socio-economic status, as well as location, access to resources and technology all influence Cambodias ability to manage the impact of climate change. Different social groups experience climate vulnerability differently and women, children, the disabled, the elderly and other socially marginalised groups often feel the impacts of climate change disproportionately.

For the development of the SNC9, climate change impacts and vulnerability were assessed for the most vulnerable sectors, namely agriculture and water resources, forestry, coastal zones, and human health.

The impact of climate change on yield is quite significant. Under the high emission scenario (SRES-A2)10, wet season rice yield (rain-fed) is continuously expected to decrease until 2080 and could fall by up to 70% of current yield levels. Similarly, for the dry season, (irrigated) rice yields for crops planted in November and December could decrease by 40%. The negative impacts on agricultural production can lead to breakdown of food systems, and vulnerable groups risk further deterioration into food and nutrition crises if exposed to extreme climate events. Adaptation strategies, for example additional time in sourcing water or pasture, can particularly affect women labour allocation, in turn influencing time available for childcare and feeding (e.g. breastfeeding exclusively, preparing healthy meals). Further strain on the contribute to low birth weight, leading to increases in risks of undernutrition and non-communicable diseases11.

Forestry: More than 4 million hectares of lowland forest, especially those located in the northeast and southwest, which currently have a water deficit period of between four and six months, will become exposed to a water deficit period of between six and deforestation, increases the risk of landslides13.

Coastal zones: Rising sea levels are expected to impact coastal systems through inundation, flood and storm damage, loss of wetlands, erosion, saltwater intrusion, and rising water tables. Analysis of the impact of sea-level rises on coastal areas suggests that a total area of about 25,000 ha would be permanently inundated by a sea level rise of one metre, increasing to 38,000 ha at a sea level rise of two metres.

Under a high emissions scenario, and without large investments in adaptation, an annual average of 30,700 people are projected to be affected by flooding due to sea level rises between 2070 and 210014. Cambodia also faces inland river flood risks. It is projected that by 2030 an additional 69,800 people may be at risk of river floods annually as a result of climate change, above the estimated 89,700 annually affected population in 2010.

The spatial pattern of malaria risk in Cambodia has been found to change as rainfall and temperature change in the future. The transmission risk tends to increase until changes can also result in lower food production in the tropics as well as heat-related diseases.

In addition, the SNC highlighted gaps in information on the role of ecosystems and natural protection assets such as soils, forests, coral reefs, and sea grasses in preventing losses due to climate change, as well as helping to build adaptive capacity.

Cambodias adaptation contribution follows the planning and implementation cycle of the NAP process and integrates elements that are specific to the NDC.

Similarly, to mitigation, the template used to ensure comparability across adaptation actions is illustrated below.

Government priority: 1=not in line with a government priority; 2= no government policy in place; 3=in line with a government priority Resilience potential: Vulnerable communities targeted etc. Targets: 1= target is difficult to reach; 2= target is easy to reach Co-benefits: 1= action does not have many co-benefits;

2= action has many co-benefits Finance: 1= cost/benefits= negative; 2=cost/benefits=medium; 3= cost/benefits= positive Technology: 1= not available; 2= available Gender: 1= no impact on equality, no gender inclusion; 2= medium impact on equality, medium gender inclusion; 3= good possibility to build equality, gender inclusion.

All line ministries with adaptation relevance submitted their proposed priority actions, which are presented in Annex 2.

The following table summarises the proposed adaptation actions subdivided by sectors and the corresponding lead ministry.

The focus sectors, in line with the vulnerability of the country, are the followings (58):  Agriculture, including agribusiness, animal health and production, agriculture / energy, and agriculture / gender (17 actions)  Infrastructure  including roads, buildings, and urban land use planning (15 actions)  Water resources (6 actions).

2 Development of Rice crops for increase production, improved quality-safety; harvesting and post harvesting technique and agro-business enhancement 3 Development of Horticulture and other food crops for increase production, improved quality-safety; harvesting and post harvesting technique and agro-business enhancement 4 Development of Industry crops for increase in production, improved quality-safety; harvesting and post harvesting technique and agro-business enhancement 5 Improvement of support services and capacity building to crop production resilient to climate change by promoting research, trials and up-scaling climate-smart farming systems that increase resilience to CC and extreme weather events 7 Research for the development and enhancement of agricultural productivity, quality, and transfer through strengthening of crop variety conservation and new crop variety release responding to the impacts of climate change 8 Development of new technologies and increased yields by using new crop varieties which adapt to climate change 9 Development of rubber clone varieties suitable for AEZ and resilient to climate change 10 Enhancing institutional and capacity development on climate change impact, vulnerability assessment, adaption measures and mitigation related to rubber sector 11 Improvement of animal breeding technology in Cambodia through AI which can adapt to climate change 12 Promotion of research capacities on animal genetic, animal breeding, and animal feed is strengthened to adapt to climate change 14 Promoting aquaculture production systems and practices that are more adaptive to climate change 15 Promoting climate resilience in the capture fisheries sector Agriculture MAFF 16 Scaled up climateresilient agricultural production through increased access to solar irrigation systems and other climate resilient practices 17 Developing a training manual and providing training on approaches for development of climate-smart and sustainable livelihood to rural poor people 18 Protection, risk mitigation, and resilience building from marine pollution particularly caused by activities on land including marine pollution from waste and aquaculture activities.

19 Effective management and protection of ecological systems of marine and costal zones to avoid adverse impacts from various factors, build their resilience and restore its functions for productive and healthy oceans 20 Conduct climate risk analysis for the existing electricity infrastructures and provide recommendations 22 Enable effective decision-making for health interventions through generation of information and improved surveillance or early-warning systems 24 Strengthen and provide capacity building of technical guidelines for diagnosis, detection, control, prevention and treatment of vector-borne and water-borne diseases, injuries and other food poisoning illnesses arising from climate change 25 Conduct water sanitation and hygiene (WASH) assessments on climate change and develop planning for communities and health facilities.

26 Strengthen institutional capacities to effectively integrate climate risks and adaptation options in health sector planning and implementation 27 Heat stress adaptation for industrial production Industry MISTI 28 Integrating climate change response measures onto the construction design for buildings and for rural housing (use of modern integration of technology) 29 Develop resilient infrastructure of school buildings in response to climate change 30 Implement climate change and disaster resilient construction and infrastructure standards including for public sector and community-focused buildings covering public health, education, WASH etc.

31 Prepare spatial planning (city/district/municipality) guidelines at all levels for climate change adaptation Integrating climate change response measures to the commune land use planning 32 Integrating climate change response measures to the policy of social land concession (SLC) and its procedures 33 Prepare modality of standardized green spaces for urban planning or new sub-cities to address vulnerability of urbanization.

34 Vulnerability assessment towards the development of climate change strategic plans to respond to the impacts on land, housings, coastal management and building due to climate change 35 Promote Land Use Planning Tools for urban houses and building construction adaptive to climate change benefits to the low-income and homeless people 36 Promote proper low-cost shelters for low-income households resilient to climate change, practically in the area of social land concession 37 Development of building code with mainstreaming climate change into building designs 38 Mainstream climate change response measures into coastal development planning against sea water intrusion, sea water rise and seasonal storm destruction, and rising temperature 40 Develop national road construction and maintenance design standards for national and provincial roads, considering climate change impacts, including developing an M&E framework for climate proofing and low-carbon technology roads 41 Repair and rehabilitate existing road infrastructure and ensure effective operation and maintenance systems, considering climate change impact 43 Develop and annually update national and subnational multi- hazard and climate risk assessments, including the identification of the most vulnerable communities 44 National end-to-end early warning systems with focus on effective dissemination to populations at risk 46 Building resilience of biodiversity conservation and restoration to adapt to climate change 48 Strengthen flood resiliency capacity of communities around lake Tonle Sap (access to clean water, off grid renewable energy and waste management) 49 Building climate resilient livelihood and public infrastructures in social land concession for vulnerable communities 50 Provide capacity building and supports for climate change innovation at the provincial along Tonle Sap River 51 Raising public awareness on climate change innovation at all levels Tourism MOT 52 Practicing smart agriculture in tourism sector Tourism MOT 53 Establish an automated nation-wide hydromet monitoring network and data transmission program, including the collection of climate and hydrological data 54 Establish a centralized and standardized approach to climate- resilient water management 55 Establish a national climate and flood warning system, including a service centre and flood emergency response plans In addition, a number of Ministries also play an enabling role to facilitate the implementation of actions within the NDC. Such actions can be divided into the followings (29):

1 Upgrading curriculum and training methodologies, including libraries, to include climate change subjects in primary schools 3 Build centres of excellence for delivering climate change courses and research among Universities 4 Conduct training for education officials on climate change e.g. as a required component of teacher training 5 Strengthen institutional capacities at national and sub-national levels to integrate gender responsiveness in climate change adaptation policies, plans, programming, including gender sensitive budgeting 6 Enhance coordination and implementing accountability mechanisms to reduce climate change vulnerabilities of disadvantaged women and other marginalized groups such as ethnic minority women and men, People with Disabilities (PWD), youth, and the elderly 7 Enhance monitoring and evaluation systems of sectoral ministries to track gender outcomes in climate change initiatives with a particular focus on collecting and managing sex-disaggregated data, gender indicators and budgeting, outcome-based reporting and the dissemination and up-scaling of the gender and climate change adaptation related knowledge generated.

8 Capacity Development for GCCC members and sectoral ministries on Gender analysis, gender responsive budgeting and NDC 11 Local government and Climate Change-III (LGCC3) Governance NCDD 12 Reducing vulnerability of local communities though sub-national 13 Enhance the quality of broadcasting means and expand the capacity of coverage for raising awareness on climate change nationwide 14 Training and enhancing human capacity on climate change in the information sector 15 Urge private media organizations to participate in covering climate change related topics and to complement state broadcasting agencies.

16 Urge and encourage to reduce (or ban) all forms of commercial advertisement that has negative impact on the environment 17 News coverage and program production for awareness raising on climate change and its impacts 18 Building climate resilience for district and commune governance through policy and strategic development plan reform (Focus on implementation) 19 Mainstreaming climate change into Education Strategic Plan 2019- 2023 Strategic Plan and SDG4 Roadmap for Education 2030 20 Strengthen the cooperation with local and International development agencies, NGOs and relevant institutions for technical and financial support to implement the adaptation planning in the media sector 21 Development of climate change national/capital/ provincial development plans including an M&E system with specific indicators 22 Development of a climate change public investment program for the national/capital/ provincial levels 23 Building adaptive and resilient capacity for MRD officers at national and sub-national level for mainstreaming climate change into rural development planning processes and technical design.

24 Build adaptive capacity on climate change for Village leaders (Village Development Committees, VDCs) 26 Update and implement the Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan (CCCSP) for 2024-2033 27 Integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and sectoral strategies and plans 28 Enhance institutional capacity on climate change (mitigation, adaptation, policy, strategies, planning, and finance) through awareness raising, training, and advocacy.

The initial NDC was developed in a short period of time, which made far-reaching consultations challenging. As such, it was understood that some crucial areas of climate change policy and implementation were not adequately analysed, specifically 1) Gender; 2) Youth involvement; and 3) Private sector engagement. Most Ministries included the implications of each action across these areas. These are presented and summarised below. It is also important to highlight an additional area related to Indigenous People. The Cambodian Constitution recognises that all Khmer citizens (which include indigenous people under the National Policy on the Development of Indigenous Peoples) are equal before the law regardless of race, colour, national origin, etc. Indigenous people are also protected by the Land Law (2001), the Forest Law (2002), the Protected Areas Law (2008), and the National REDD+ Strategy, among others. During the NDC implementation and particularly for mitigation measures in the FOLU, the RGC will seek to promote the rights of indigenous peoples, specifically concerning land ownership. Respect for the traditional knowledge held by indigenous peoples is integral to an understanding of traditional livelihoods and of culture and is, therefore, an essential component of safeguarding these rights.

Climate change affects gender minorities disproportionately, including women and girls. The areas where women play a central role - food security, nutrition, energy, livelihoods, health, natural resource management, among others - are those most directly impacted by climate change. By exaggerating gender inequality, climate change also reinforces a structural root cause of violence against women and girls18.

In prioritising climate solutions, a gender-balanced approach should incorporate the intersectional needs of the population to ensure inclusivity. Addressing gender inequalities is, therefore, a priority for Cambodia and gender has been effectively mainstreamed across planning and budgeting, including in the context of addressing climate change.

Notably, the CCCSP includes a strategic objective to reduce sectoral, regional, gender vulnerability and health risks to climate change impacts. The Ministry mandated with planning and facilitating the implementation of gender issues is the Ministry of Womens Affairs (MOWA). The MOWA has formed a Gender and Climate Change Committee, which gathers information on gender and climate change, conducts studies on the impact of climate change on women and children and builds climate change capacity in the ministrys departments. The MOWA has also integrated climate change, green growth, and disaster risk management into Neary Rattanak IV, the National Policy on Gender Equality and Womens Empowerment. In addition, as part of Cambodias periodic reporting to the Convention on Council for Women (CNCW) responds specifically to the disproportionate impacts of climate change on rural women and acknowledges the policy and programme efforts underway in Cambodia to mitigate these impacts19.

As part of this NDC update, all Ministries acknowledged the importance of addressing gender issues, particularly womens participation in climate action. Most priority actions have a specific target for womens participation that ranges from 15% to 70%. Gender and age disaggregated data are crucially important in measuring the success of the gender targets, not only related to womens participation but also womens access to skills and technology, as well as women in climate-related decision making.

Mitigation priority actions, including energy, waste, and transport, all have linkages to gender equality and social inclusion and the potential to contribute to several gender-based indicators. In relation to energy priorities such as (1) access to energy in rural areas and (2) the diversification of household and community energy generation sources to reduce reliance on biomass as an energy source, women are often responsible for household energy- related decisions in rural areas, and women, the poor and the marginalised are often last to 19 CEDAW (2018) Sixth periodic report submitted by Cambodia under Article 18 of the Convention, due in 2017.

All mitigation sectors have encouraged the equal involvement of men and women in mitigation actions. However, the waste and energy sectors show a higher tendency of maintaining a gender balance and encouraging womens participation. For example, women and children often constitute a large portion of informal waste pickers. Therefore, formalising the waste sector management and creating decent jobs could have a significant impact on ensuring stable livelihoods for women. Projects such as those in the composting market can benefit both men and women.

There is high potential to contribute to gender equality through increasing energy access in rural areas, by diversifying household and community energy generation sources. For example, by reducing the reliance on biomass as an energy source. Women are also often responsible for the majority of household energy-related decisions in rural areas. Gender equality can be encouraged in mitigation actions such as through eco-payments.

In the transport sector, women generally use public transport more than men. Ensuring safe, efficient and comfortable transport for women may increase their access to higher education centres, skills development centres and other resources in urban areas.

Women constitute a higher proportion of the working population in agriculture, and the forestry sector is seen as providing strong opportunities to improve gender balance. In the forestry sector, and particularly for REDD+, there is a need to recognise the diversity of stakeholders, particularly among forest communities. In addition to continuing the enhancement of invited spaces for womens groups, it will be important for gender Systems and the broader REDD+ monitoring system.

Skilled agricultural, forestry, and fishery workers are the most common occupations (31%) among Cambodias working population20. Women (32.5%) make up slightly more of the employed population than men (28.5%)21. This category, however, this does not account for the self-employed or those working their own land, which is very common in Cambodias agrarian-based economy. Women have a strong role to play in this sector and in value chain development in particular. Priorities include the need to increase womens income generation while decreasing their work burden by improving agricultural practices and access to technology, as well as fostering womens collective working groups.

In terms of infrastructure, particularly in climate proofing of buildings and roads, opportunities for women to contribute more prominently to restoration and construction are needed, in order to increase their access to income and livelihoods.

In the human health sector, the importance of gender-disaggregated data is considered a priority, especially to understand the different impacts of air-and vector-borne diseases on women and men. This is of particular significance to women, who often carry the burden of household care including medical care for the family, but who also play an important role in championing behavioural patterns which may improve health and hygiene and reduce disease spread22. In Disaster Risk Management (DRM), little gender-disaggregated data collection exists, therefore information on the differentiated impacts of disasters on women, the elderly, children, disabled people, and other socially marginalised groups is largely strengthened, particularly in the potential role women and children can play a key role in developing and monitoring emergency response plans.

It is crucial to develop training and awareness materials that take particular gender-based needs and priorities into account to ensure that women and girls benefit equally from 20 National Institute of Statistics (2018). CSES 2017 Final Report 21 National Institute of Statistics (2018). CSES 2017 Final Report 22 See Cambodias Second National Communication to the UNFCCC (2015) for more information and targets on reducing risk to and death due to malaria transmission.

The Ministry of Education, Youth, and Sports (MoEYS) is the lead Ministry mandated with ensuring youth engagement in all relevant sectors, including in climate change. Some Ministries have indicated where youth engagement can be most appropriate.

The involvement of youth in mitigation actions tends to be lower than in adaptation.

However, youth are encouraged to participate in programmes in the relevant sectors, including energy, industry, and transport.

In the infrastructure sector, youth could provide inputs in construction design, given their role as workers. In DRM they can promote and share knowledge of Early Warning Systems conservation), their role in awareness-raising campaigns is crucial. Youth also play a key role in the tourism sector, from working in eco-tourism to promoting local organic products. Youth are also a target of higher education abroad programmes, especially in the water resources sector. Overall, they can engage in volunteering activities related to education, training, and outreach and also through specific media programmes.

Beyond direct engagement in these sectors, children and youth play a critical role in the development, implementation, monitoring, and enforcement of climate actions across sectors  they need to be engaged at the national and local levels to participate meaningfully in the development of climate policies, including the NDC and NAP. They need to be empowered to be able to act as leaders of the next generation, educated on their environmental rights and equipped with the necessary skills, knowledge and training for a green transition.

Most actions will be effective only through the engagement of the sector-appropriate private sector players, including through Public Private Partnerships (PPPs). Private sector entry points have been identified with most of the ministries, and engagement is highlighted in the NDC implementation through directed actions. Private sector partners will need to be engaged to develop PPPs for climate solutions, beyond a donor-based approach, that can be applied sector-wide.

Some of the challenges and opportunities for PPPs include23:

An absence of reliable data on private sector investments, including difficulties in covering all parts of the economy;

The size of the informal sector which accounts for more than half of Cambodias GDP;

Small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) make up the majority of businesses in Cambodia (only 0.2 % are companies with at least 100 employees; 98% of companies employment.

Through addressing some of these challenges and opportunities, there is potential to accelerate climate action with the private sector through PPPs.

In general, all mitigation sectors require strong public and private sector collaboration to ensure effectiveness. Based on existing climate related data and information available, the private sector is predominantly involved in the industry, waste and energy sectors, while less information is available for other sectors, namely transport, forestry, and agriculture.

23 UNICEF EAPRO Climate Action Advocacy Development in ASEAN Region draft report While the main potential to scale up private investments relate to mitigation efforts, barriers can be removed in order to stimulate private sector adaptation engagement, not least in the agriculture, human health, and fisheries sectors24.

In all sectors, and crucially in buildings and infrastructure, it is in the interest of the private sector to be involved in policymaking and planning and to ensure guidelines and standards are appropriate and implementable. Private sector players are equally involved as input and technology providers (such as in innovative and more resilient clean energy, agriculture, and water spaces), as service providers (such as in eco-tourism or technical assistance to sectors such as water) or as financiers to many other actions, or can themselves be involved in awareness, training and education, such as through private media and universities.

The Department of Climate Change (DCC) of the GSSD led a preliminary assessment of the NDC implementation and identification of gaps, as well as the development of the corresponding NDC Roadmap and Stakeholder Engagement Plan. This ensured that the country was able to review her NDC targets by the COP 26 meeting and is expected to achieve her stated contributions by 2030.

The process for the formulation of the NDC roadmap allowed for an initial engagement of stakeholders in key sectors in the discussion of which resources and mechanisms could be leveraged and what would still need to be put in place to ensure full delivery of the NDC implementation, as emerged from the process detailed above, is presented below.

The NDC update process initiated with the line ministries in March 2020 helped ascertain whether certain targets would need to be adjusted and whether Cambodia would be able to raise her level of ambition. Strong engagement continued throughout the process: experts from development partners, including UNWOMEN, FAO, UNDP, UNICEF, World Bank, GGGI, and WHO provided specialist advice both to line ministries and inputting directly in this document. In addition, a private sector event was organised, with wide participation of stakeholders from different sectors, and local communities and indigenous peoples have been engaged in the process. Every effort was made to conduct such consultations in a gender responsive way.

Cambodias NDC places strong focus on the CCCSP 2014-23 (2013) and related Sectoral Action Plans for its implementation, in addition to the following, some of which have been developed since 2015:

MRV/Transparency Limited measurement of progress and development of transparency system  The Circular Economy Strategy and Action Plan is also being advanced. This outlines the key vision, mission, strategies, and roadmap for Cambodia to transition towards society.

In addition, there are a number of other sectoral policies and strategies, detailed action by action in the Annexes, including the below:

Strategic Planning Framework for Fisheries 2010  2019 (2010).

The NCSD is the focal point for the UNFCCC, in addition to covering a number of other roles. The DCC/GSSD has played a key role in coordination within the government, integration into planning and budgeting, in addition to capacity building and overall stakeholder engagement economic, environmental, social, and cultural balance within the Kingdom of Cambodia. It also includes an Executive Committee and a Secretariat (housed at the Ministry of Environment).

A General Secretariat (GSSD) was established to support the operations of the NCSD and for coordinating the development of policies, strategic plans, action plans, and legal instruments concerning sustainable development, including the green economy, climate change, biodiversity conservation and biosafety, and science and technology. The Department of Climate Change (DCC) is under the GSSD and has led technical efforts for climate change adaptation and mitigation response and reporting.

A Climate Change Technical Working Group (CCTWG) was established to facilitate and provide technical support to the National Council for Sustainable Development (NCSD) in addressing climate change in the Kingdom of Cambodia. The TWG is key to governance and to ensure decision making and implementation by key line ministries.

Committees or technical working groups have been created in several line ministries to take on the coordination responsibilities for climate change actions within their respective sectors.

Civil society is recognised as an important voice for the community and plays an important role in policy implementation. The NGO Forum is one way in which civil society can bring a voice to the NDC formulation and implementation. Development partners also provide a process of this NDC update.

An illustration of the roles and responsibilities of each stakeholder in relation to the NDC implementation can be seen in the following table.

NCSD  Coordination and integration  Capacity building and knowledge management  Stakeholder engagement MoP, MoEF  Support to integration of NDC implementation in national and subnational planning and budgeting  Support to MRV development and implementation Line ministries/Government Institutions  NDC planning and implementation in respective sectors  Provision of information to NCSD NGOs  NDC implementation  Provision of information  Provision of support  Engagement in policymaking  Representation of vulnerable groups Private/finance sector  NDC implementation  Engagement in policymaking  Provision of information Stakeholders are represented in the following organogram.

-Provision of support -Engagement in policy and provision of information to the GSSD -NDC implementation -Engagement in policy and provision of information to the GSSD This section presents an overview of the means of implementation across finance, capacity building, and technology.

Despite ongoing efforts, financial needs remain high and most actions require financial support (detailed actions are listed in the Annexes). Future resource mobilisation will look towards a reasonable mix of national and international funds, in addition to market mechanisms, where appropriate, and in line with progress on Article 6 of the Paris Agreement. The NDC Roadmap indicated that Cambodia will also require the development of a climate investment plan to aggregate finance needs, gaps, sources, options, and the creation of a project pipeline.

The following table summarises the finance needs per sector as reported by each ministry in their mitigation submissions. The total funding required for mitigation actions is over US $ 5.8 billion. The FOLU, waste, and energy sector mitigation actions require the most funds. These are mostly conditional upon international support. (Further information is provided in Appendix 4).

25 This row includes the estimated finance necessary for mitigation actions that cannot be included in the other categories (Energy, Waste, IPPU, Agriculture, FOLU), such as: 1) Promoting One Tourist, One Trees campaign; 2) Installing air quality monitoring equipment in all provinces across and establishing an air quality data monitoring center with mobile application for public information and access.

The table below summarises the finance needs per sector as reported by each ministry in their adaptation submissions. The total funding required for adaptation actions is just over US $ 2 billion. Infrastructure, water, and agriculture require the highest funding.

Livelihoods, poverty and biodiversity 211,125,000 Tourism 2,500,000 (as minimum) Of the amount indicated above, the majority is conditional upon international support. In fact, almost half of the actions specifically included an indication of conditionality, whilst only five specified that implementation may be possible, at least partially, through existing budget allocations (see detailed table in Appendix 2). In any case, more analysis will need to be carried out as part of the NDC tracking process to ensure transparency.

The NDC review identified the need for capacity building for the NDC implementation, especially for the NCSD/DCC, CCTWG, and sectoral (and sub-national) TWGs. In addition, summarises the barriers and capacity needs for the NDC implementation as submitted by each ministry and identified in the NDC review, the tackling of which will require strong international support.

Data systems to monitor and evaluate the impacts of climate change interventions  Support to strengthen the CCTWG of MLMUPC Capacity support for technical staff of the four General Department within MLMUPC as well as horizontal (line agencies) and vertical actors (sub-national government) in carrying out the activities.

Human and institutional capacity building  Financial support  Capacity on mainstreaming climate change  Integrated decision support system for integration of climate data (from various ministries) to support resilient energy infrastructure As coordinator for the NDC implementation, the MOE would be expected to build its own capacity and the one of the line ministries in a number of areas, including:

MRV/Transparency including:  GHG measurement and accounting  Negotiations skills  Public financial management  Database development  Concept and case studies on climate change, DRR, climate emergency, response planning  Data collection and monitoring systems  Integration of climate change into school  M&E framework and systems for Education Management Information System (EMIS) and climate change.

Technical and financial support from external sources both for policy development, infrastructure and behaviour change communication and awareness raising  MoP has the capacity to guide sectoral ministries to implement their activities  MoP and NCSD need capacity to assist in mainstreaming climate change in development plan. Being the key ministry to coordinate finance to the sectors, MoP might also require support in the following areas:

Capacity on climate change to be built for implementation and access to finance  For the implementation of the Government budget, MRD have enough capacity to deliver  Existing capacity is not yet sufficient for implementation. Climate change is still new  Human Resources are dedicated mostly for decentralisation and de-concentration, as reflected in the upcoming NCDD Strategy for 2021-2030 MOWA  Capacity building to better understand the concept of gender and gender analysis,  Resource person needs  Technical support  Gender safeguards mitigation measures  Capacity building on Enhance Transparency Framework (ETF) and Management Information System(s) (MIS)  Technical support to establish and operate a tracking system for the NDC, CSDG and other relevant climate change strategies Cambodia has developed a technology needs assessment for adaptation and mitigation.

Technology needs also feature prominently in the sectoral climate change action plans.

However, these are mostly out of date, as such, each ministry provided an action by action indication of technology needs and availability (see the Annexes) and summarised here.

Limited information has been provided on technology availability in mitigation sectors. In waste, required technology is available in the country and region (e.g. Thailand, Vietnam, and Malaysia). In the energy sector, technologies such as Solar Home Systems (SHS), direct and alternating current (AC/DC) micro grids, and solar battery charging stations are available in the country. In the agricultural sector for example, compost technology is currently available. Key technologies in the transport sector include digital systems for GHG management and newer technologies for electric mobility.

The agricultural sector indicated detailed technology needs for climate smart practices in all its proposed actions, ranging from stress tolerant varieties, to systems of rice intensification to integrated pest management and integrated soil and nutrient management. There are a number of innovative information platforms and databases in use for disaster risk management, including CAMDI (to monitor the impact of disasters, and the DesInventar transferred from the French and Finnish meteorological societies, in addition to manuals and toolkits such as the Community Based Disaster Risk Management Field Practitioners Handbook and the KoBo toolbox for community assessment. The energy sector continues to adapt renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies to the Cambodian context. The health sector makes use of a number of systems, such as the National Dengue Surveillance System, or the CAMEWARN, a case-based surveillance system which covers seven epidemic prone diseases and syndromes. The infrastructure sector makes use of several guidelines for climate proofing investment developed by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the World Bank. Technologies in use in the land use planning sector include land survey high technology, aerial photography for mapping, soil tests for spatial planning, downscaled climate projections and network-level vulnerability assessments. In the water resources sector, groundwater analysis, vulnerability and risk assessments, in addition to groundwater monitoring systems are in use.

The enabling sectors use a range of known technologies including radio, TV and social media for information and awareness to sharing lessons learned from other countries, or the National M&E Manual to monitor progress on indicators.

Cambodia has made significant efforts in establishing robust information systems for MRV. The country has five well-established MRV systems (GHG emissions, CCCSP, which includes Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs), 12 Clean Development Mechanism (CDMs), 6 Joint Crediting Mechanism (JCMs), and 6 Verified Emissions Reductions (VERs) and Support received).

Cambodia puts great emphasis on the development of an integrated and detailed MRV system, which is also aimed at achieving the implementation of the NDC. It will be comprised of the following components (mitigation, adaptation, GHG inventory, support received, and support needed).

The system will detail how monitoring will happen, and how data will be managed, aggregated and translated into reports, with particular attention paid to gender and vulnerable groups. A simple, accessible and understandable NDC tracking online system will be developed and the tool will be made accessible online. It is expected that, to the extent possible, the system will harmonise and track all data needs for the relevant international agencies and domestic stakeholders. It will serve as a data repository for in-country stakeholders, including to provide knowledge management for the private sector and to track their contributions to the SDGs, and international ones, particularly the UNFCCC and any other relevant international reporting agency. Verification from third parties, including academic institutions, will be considered.

The system will also consider the ISAF (accountability framework) supported by the NCDD (financed by the WB). This ensures proper accessibility of information at the community level (Information for Citizens I4C) and accountability at the commune levels to follow-up on the proposed measures.

Information for the UNFCCC Timeframes Timeframe for implementation 2020-2030 Scope and coverage Scope of gases included in the contribution Assumptions and methodological approaches Methodology for estimating emissions and projections (Excluding the FOLU sector) mitigation actions were considered to develop the NDC scenario using PROSPECT+ model.

EX-ACT tool was used for this sector because PROSPECT+ doesnt cover the FOLU sector. Historical Data: Most of the activity data was taken from the National GHG Inventory prepared in 2019 and the BUR finalised in 2020. Besides those, default values which are given by the EX-ACT based on 2006 IPCC guidelines were considered. (Data from 2000 to 2016 were used) Baseline Scenario: projections for the FOLU sector were generated by calculating emissions within the period of 2000 to 2016 using EX-ACT. Then the BAU forecasts were developed based on the forest cover percentage and deforestation rates in the country. Mitigation Scenario: These were formulated based on proposed actions submitted from all relevant ministries. The main FOLU sector targets were considered to developed mitigation scenarios.

Global Warming Potentials (GWP) GWP values used for estimating CO2e were taken from the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report to be in line with the latest updated BUR submitted in 2020 PROSPECTS+ model was used to estimate baseline and NDC emissions for sectors other than the FOLU, and EX-ACT tool for the FOLU sectors. Most of the activity data were taken from the National GHG Inventory 1994-2016 prepared in 2019 and a study on A Design of Low Carbon Development Plan Towards 2050 in Cambodia in 2016.

The core mitigation commitments of the Paris Agreement are common to all parties, but there is some differentiation in requirements. Developed countries should undertake absolute economy-wide reduction targets, while developing countries are encouraged to move toward economy-wide targets over time. Cambodia, despite being a least developed country, with an eighth of the per capita emissions when compared to the global average26, sets, in this updated NDC, ambitious sectoral reduction targets and structured and comprehensive adaptation actions.

26 Source: The World Bank, CO2e emissions per capita global database. Estimates for 2016.

Climate change mitigation and adaptation will be crucial not only to achieve SDG 13 on Climate Action, but a number of other SDGs, in addition to the Paris Agreement and given the cross-cutting nature of climate change. SDG 13 has significant implications on the achievement of other key priorities of each country, such as poverty reduction, food security, gender equality, water and sanitation, energy access, reduced inequalities, sustainable cities, and sustainable land use and ecosystems27. As such, the NDC implementation can contribute to almost all SDGs, and gender sensitive approaches can help redress gender inequalities (SDG5) and ensure women are engaged and can benefit at all levels.

As part of the Cambodia NDC revision process, an analysis on how the NDCs can impact the achievement of the SDG was carried out. Each mitigation measure and adaptation action was screened against the attainment of the SDGs. For mitigation, the SCAN tool was utilized.

Given the overlap between the SDGs and climate change action, the MRV/Transparency systems used for the NDC implementation can potentially be used to track the SDG implementation as well, especially the goals related to mitigation, adaptation, and finance.

They could also be used to track the gender sensitive impact of climate actions and effectiveness of gender mainstreaming initiatives if appropriate gender indicators are embedded into the M&E framework and appropriate resources and monitored.

Urban planning tools for climate change mitigation and the urban planning solution in three sub cities Improvement of process performance of EE by establishment of energy management in buildings/industries MAFF Energy saving, reduce GHG and pollution from waste water, health and environment friendly, increased income and value added and employment, and safety working environment Development of strategies for waste management including hazardous waste management (MISTI focuses on technical aspect of waste management inside the factories; Improve process only) New sanitary landfills with LFG extraction and LFG extraction at the Dangkor Landfill Potential for private sector engagement in financing, constructing, and operating sanitary landfill and LFG systems MoE Reduced fire hazard - Decrease risk of collapse - Odour control - Reduced health hazard - Energy for leachate evaporation -Prevention of surface and groundwater contamination from toxic waste components Bio-digesters construction (85% reduction compared to 2000)(Small size (2-3-4m3); Medium size(6-8-10m3), Large size(>10m3) MoE Job creation -Reduced odour nuisance- local organic fertilizer production-less leachate leakage from landfill-less landfill space required, so cost-savings (but space required for composting) MoE 1. Job creation 2. Reduced odour nuisance 3. Local organic fertilizer production (bioslurry) 4. Less leachate leakage from landfill 5. less landfill space required Implementation of National 3R strategy MoE Achieving a recycle process with an environmental and economic purpose contributes to the goal of the environment and sustainability Application of electrical equipment labelling & MEPS (Lighting, Cooling & Equipment) MME 1. Reducing inefficient appliances/technologies uses 2. Informing the citizens of possibilities to improve EE and of related benefits Building codes and enforcement/certification for new buildings and those undergoing major renovation MME Energy efficiency standards, laws and regulations concerning building energy codes are being elaborated and promulgated MME Resolve of economic viability of investing in the improvement of energy efficiency of the equipment Improve sustainability of charcoal production through enforcement of regulations Increase energy access to rural area MME Local community has electricity 24 hours Incorporate renewable energy resources (solar, wind, hydro, biomass) into energy mix Diversification of household and community energy generation sources to reduce reliance on biomass as an energy sources NCDD a) Improve knowledge of local governance on impact of climate change will lead to mitigate GHG emission b) NCDD will also implement ESS, Gender, M&E along with climate action Toward Battambang city to green city NCDD a) Improve knowledge of local governance on impact of climate change will lead to mitigate GHG emission) NCDD will also implement ESS, Gender, M&E along with climate action) Paradigm shift MISTI Improving energy productivity, reducing ambient temperatures through ventilation and cooling optimization and decreasing fugitive heat losses from steam and compressed air delivery systems 1.1: Upgrade to efficient boiler 1.2: Sewing machine 1.3: Washing machine 1.4: Drying machine 1.5: Compressors 1.6: Efficient lightning appliance 2: Sustainable energy practices in brick industry Improving brick kiln efficiency can improve the safety of brick kiln operation through implementation of better safety features that reduce risk of injury during loading of fuel and handling of bricks. Reducing the toxicity and amount of emission pollutants coming from brick kilns is also an expected benefit to implementing energy efficient technology.

3: Sustainable energy practices in food & beverage Industry 3.1: Replacing inefficient boilers in the F&B industry Improving energy productivity, reducing ambient temperatures through ventilation and cooling optimization and decreasing fugitive heat losses from steam and compressed air delivery systems Enhance maintenance and inspection of vehicle(Piloting maintenance and emission inspections of vehicles) MPWT 1. Reduce maintenance cost/saving cost 2. Reduce traffic accident, injury and fatality 3. reduce air pollution 4. reduce GHG emission5. innovate technology Increasing the effectiveness and sustainability of agricultural land management techniques (Conservation Agriculture) MAFF Sustainable land management, reduce emission from burned agriculture residue, protect soil from erosion Organic input agriculture and bio-slurry; and deep placement fertilizer technology MAFF Reduction of chemical fertilizer utilization, contribution to mitigate the greenhouse gases, reduce production cost and pollution, and soil improvement Promote fodder production to improve high nutrient rich and high-quality forage feed value agriculture by-products technology to support cattle production MAFF Increase soil organic carbon, Enhanced adoption by farmers of improved fodder technology has significantly increased animals production and household income Promote manure Management through compost making process to reduce carbon emission MAFF Increase GAHP Good Animals Health Practice enhanced adoption by improving animal farms and slaughterhouses; household NCDD a) Climate Change mitigation as the project considering of low-carbon agricultural technology b) Improved new management approach in agroecosystem c) NCDD will also implement ESS, Gender, M&E along with climate actions according to GCF standards Development of Rice crops for increase production, improved quality-safety; harvesting and post harvesting technique and agro-business enhancement MAFF Promote climate-friendly Agri- business rice value chain and profit in rice production value chains. Mitigating impact of rice farming on environment Development of Horticulture and other food crops for increase production, improved quality-safety; harvesting and post harvesting technique and agro-business enhancement food security and income generation among the youth groups.

Development of Industry crops for increase in production, improved quality-safety; harvesting and post harvesting technique and agro-business enhancement MAFF Promote climate-friendly Agri- business value chain and profit generation boosting local food security through diversification, reduction in soil degradation and greenhouse gas emissions through fostering eco-system services through CSA practices.

Improvement of support services and capacity building to crop production resilient to climate change by promoting research, trials and up-scaling climate-smart farming systems that increase resilience to CC and extreme weather events MAFF Increasing resilience to climate change and natural disasters, and improving resilience facilities, tools and technologies.

MAFF Mitigation: reduce pollution from processing Environmental: Prevent soil erosion Social: healthy living conditions for people in the cassava production areas Research for the development and enhancement of agricultural productivity, quality, and transfer through strengthening of crop variety conservation and new crop variety release responding to the impacts of climate change Development of new technologies and increased yields by using new crop varieties which adapt to climate change Development of rubber clone varieties suitable for AEZ and resilient to climate change MAFF Maintain and improved rubber production and provide employment; Improvement of rubber plant genetic and fully scientifically documented; Increased revenue by reduced maintaining cost; Mitigation as rubber plantation requested CO2e Economic growth Enhancing institutional and capacity development on climate change impact, vulnerability assessment, adaption measures and mitigation related to rubber sector MAFF Sustainable rubber production to support economic development and employment Improvement of animal breeding technology in Cambodia through Artificial Intelligence (AI) which can adapt to climate change Promotion of research capacities on animal genetic, animal breeding, and animal feed is strengthened to adapt to climate change Promoting aquaculture production systems and practices that are more adaptive to climate change MAFF Develop aquaculture system increase production, enhance livelihoods related to food and nutrition security, reduce fishing pressure on fisheries resources MAFF Develop fishes and aquatic habitats, sustain fish yields, strengthen food and nutrition security Scaled up climateresilient agricultural production through increased access to solar irrigation systems and other climateresilient practices NCDD a) GHG emission reduction through solar irrigation b) NCDD will also implement ESS, Gender, M&E along with climate actions according to GCF standards Developing a training manual and providing training on approaches for development of climate-smart and sustainable livelihood to rural poor people MRD -Adaptive capacity of rural poor people will contribute to livelihood promotion and be environmentally friendly Protection, risk mitigation, and resilience building from marine pollution particularly caused by activities on land including marine pollution from waste and aquaculture activities.

Effective management and protection of ecological systems of marine and costal zones to avoid adverse impacts from various factors, build their resilience and restore its functions for productive and healthy oceans Conduct climate risk analysis for the existing electricity infrastructures and provide recommendations MME a) Forest fire prevention and biodiversity protection b) Local community safety and life protection c) Water and air pollution Enable effective decision-making for health interventions through generation of information and improved surveillance or early-warning systems MOH - Social: improve health care system and enable remote village to have proper access to healthcare -Indirect: reduce risks of life- lost and losing money on long- distance travel to healthcare MOH - Community has better planning to maintain a reliable, safe supply of water, sanitation - Improving quality of care through water, sanitation and hygiene in health care facilities Strengthen and provide capacity building of technical guidelines for diagnosis, detection, control, prevention and treatment of vector- borne and water-borne diseases, injuries and other food poisoning illnesses arising from climate change MOH Capacity for health professionals improved to identify and treat climate-sensitive health issues Conduct water sanitation and hygiene (WASH) assessment on climate change and develop planning for communities and health facilities.

Strengthen institutional capacities to effectively integrate climate risks and adaptation options in health sector planning and implementation MOH Capacity of health personnel improved to identify and treat to climate-sensitive disease Integrating climate change response measures onto the construction design for buildings and for rural housing (use of modern integration of technology) The results also revealed that "search about alternative methods for construction to mitigate the adverse impacts of construction on the environment" was ranked in the second position with regard to proposed solutions to mitigate the environmental impacts of construction.

Develop resilient infrastructure of school buildings in response to climate change MOEYS a) Energy saving b) Low carbon building c) Strengthen school capacity to accommodate more students Implement climate change and disaster resilient construction and infrastructure standards including for public sector and community-focused buildings covering public health, education, WASH, etc.

- Potential for community groups (e.g. school support committees) to be involved in construction/retrofitting (DLUP) Prepare spatial planning (city/district/municipality) guidelines at all levels for climate change adaptation (CLUP) Integrating climate change response measures to the commune land use planning Integrating climate change response measures to the policy of social land concession (SLC) and its procedures Prepare modality of standardized green spaces for urban planning or new sub-cities to address vulnerability of urbanization.

MLMUPC Mitigation co-benefit: contribution to the local GHG emission Environment co-benefit: ecosystem restoration (i.e. regulate water) Social co-benefit: job creation, improved public health Vulnerability assessment towards the development of climate change strategic plans to respond to the impacts on land, housings, coastal management, and building due to climate change MLMUPC Contribution to climate data related to cities through finding of the assessments Promote land use planning tools for urban houses and building construction adaptive to climate change benefits to the low-income and homeless people MLMUPC The project will produce low- carbon emissions to enhance environmental atmosphere Social co-benefit: build assets (housing) for low income and homeless people Promote proper low-cost shelters for low- income households resilient to climate change, practically in the area of social land concession MLMUPC The project will produce low- carbon emission that is to enhance environmental atmosphere Social co-benefit: reduce land conflict, improve livelihood of beneficiaries through provision of low-cost shelters in the areas of social land concession Development of building code with mainstreaming climate change into building designs MLMUPC Energy consumption in building sectors Reduction of GHG in atmosphere Promote low-cost materials for building and housing Improve health and safety of city inhabitants Mainstream climate change response measures into coastal development planning against sea water intrusion, sea water rise and seasonal storm destruction, and rising temperature MLMUPC Promote sea engineering environment, sea water rise, sea tidal hazard, seawater intrusion and sea erosion Disaster management to protect coastal populations Strengthening climate resilient city NCDD Strengthen knowledge and capacity on resilient city. Financing for resilient cities. Partnership and communication.

Develop national road construction and maintenance design standards for national and provincial roads, considering climate change impact including M&E framework develop for climate proofing and low-carbon technology roads MPWT Reduce road repair/ rehabilitation cost Reduce vehicle maintenance Save time Ensure flow of traffic and transportation Repair and rehabilitate existing road infrastructure and ensure effective operation and maintenance systems, considering climate change impact - Planting tree along road and highway to reduce heat and emission produced by road - Ensure sustainability of water run-off for the intersection of water way and road line MRD - Contribute to GHG reduction - Food Security, - Agriculture market connectivity, Develop and annually update national and subnational multi-hazard and climate risk assessments, including identification of most vulnerable communities.

National end-to-end Early Warning Systems with focus on effective dissemination to populations at risk NCDM Other sectors, i.e. water resources and meteorology, agriculture will be of benefited by potential cross- sectoral mitigation activities.

NCDM - Social resilience at community level and increased engagement in disaster preparedness and response Building resilience of biodiversity conservation and restoration to adapt to climate change Strengthen flood resiliency capacity of communities around Tonle Sap (access to clean water, off grid renewable energy, and waste management) Building climate resilient livelihood and public infrastructures in social land concession for vulnerable communities NCDD Modality: the project designed as potential for scaling up through its key success of implementation. It would be the key recommendation for the improvement of social land concession implementation to include climate change as one of main focus while community will really need support to cope with such climate change issues when settle-in new development area of social land concession sites. Improve knowledge: the project will help to improve understanding for sub-national level, local authorities on climate change both of adaptation and mitigation though join implementation follow decentralize approach under coordination of National Committee for Sub-National Democratic Development Secretariat (NCDDS). Similarly, the community groups will also receive training and awareness raising to build their sense understanding climate change to engage fully participation for the project implementation. This will positively contribute to both of adaption and mitigation action in the future.

Provide capacity building and supports for climate change innovation at the provincial along Tonle Sap River MOT Encouraging all involvement tourism stakeholders for better the understanding and to engage their contribution on adaptation to two beneficiaries: 1) Environmental Education Development on green tourism, 2) Peam Krosoap was estimated be upgrade and innovated for climate change adaptation. Cambodia CBET/CET standard, 3) The quality of ecotourism services and products would improve through by tourism innovation. 4) Reducing poverty and contribute to responding effectively to climate change, so it is increasing the gross domestic product of Cambodia (GDP).

Establish an automated nation-wide hydromet monitoring network and data transmission program, including collection of climate and hydrological data MOWRAM Data can be used cross-sectorally and for short- and long-term projection Supporting disaster risk reduction, and other mitigation activities Supporting River Basin management planning and monitoring activities Supporting hydrological modelling works and decision support system (DSS) Establish a centralized and standardized approach to climate-resilient water management MOWRAM Improved relationships between all major water users Improved water allocation and abstraction limits -> reverse/halt overdevelopment impacts Protection of environmental flows as the support of basin human needs and ecosystem Establish a national climate and flood warning system, including a service centre and flood emergency response plans MOWRAM Other sectors, i.e. agriculture will benefit by potential cross-sectoral mitigation activities Flood risk reduction and mitigation NCDD a) Sustainable water management b) Reduce water pollution c) NCDD will also implement ESS, Gender, M&E along with climate actions according to GCF standards MOWRAM Improved relationships between all major water users Increased productivity of agricultural sector Improved water allocation and abstraction limits and reverse/halt overdevelopment impacts Protection of environmental flows as the support of basin human needs and ecosystem Increased drought management MRD Changing attitude and practices of rural people to be more environmentally friendly Upgrading curriculum and training methodologies, including libraries, to include climate change subjects for primary schools MOEYS Students shall understand: a) climate change mitigation b) Pollution c) Biodiversity d) Environment conservation e) 5Rs MOEYS Students shall understand: a) climate change mitigation b) Pollution c) Biodiversity d) Environment conservation e) 5Rs Build centres of excellence for delivering climate change courses and research among Universities MOEYS a ) climate change mitigation b) Pollution reduction c) Biodiversity d) Environment conservation e) 5Rs Conduct training for education officials on climate change e.g. as a required component of teacher training MOEYS a) climate change mitigation b) Pollution c) Biodiversity d) Environment conservation e) 5Rs Strengthen institutional capacities at national and sub-national levels to integrate gender responsiveness in climate change adaptation's policies, plans, programming, including gender budgeting MOWA Improve gender equality, Gender responsive action, Gender responsive budgeting in policies planning of action and programmes Enhance coordination and implementing accountability mechanisms to reduce climate change vulnerabilities of disadvantaged women and other marginalized groups such as ethnic minority women and men, People with Disability (PWD), youth, and elderly MOWA Increase collaboration with Ministries, institutions, civil society, development partners and the private sector in an efficient and accountable manner Extending the scope of partnership building Increase the family economy, food and nutrition Security Enhance monitoring and evaluation systems of sectoral ministries to track gender outcomes in climate change initiatives with particular focus on collecting and managing sex-disaggregated data, gender indicators and budgeting, outcome-based reporting, and dissemination and up-scaling of the gender and climate change adaptation related knowledge generated.

Capacity development for GCCC members and sectoral ministries on Gender analysis, gender responsive and NDC MOWA Capacity development Promotion of gender in social inclusiveness Reduction of gender gap in social environment MOWA Mainstreaming gender and social inclusion in NDC Analysis of gender integration in NDC (both adaptation and mitigation) Reducing vulnerability of local communities though sub-national climate governance reform (focusing on policy) NCDD a) NCDD will also implement ESS, Gender, M&E along with climate actions according to GCF standards Information Enhance the quality of broadcasting means and expand the capacity of coverages for raising awareness on climate change nationwide MOINF - GHG mitigation - Environmental protection - Forest protection - Biodiversity conservation Urge private Media organizations to participate in covering/broadcasting the climate change topics and to complement the state broadcasting agencies.

Urge and encourage to reduce (or ban) all forms of commercial advertisement that has negative impact on environment Knowledge sharing News coverage and program production for awareness raising on climate change and its impacts Building climate resilience for district and commune governance through policy and strategic development plan reform (Focus on implementation) Mainstreaming climate change into Education Strategic Plan 2019-2023 Strategic Plan and SDG4 Roadmap for Education 2030 MOEYS a) Climate change adaptation b) Policy, Planning & Guidelines, c) Strengthening d) Research enhancement Strengthen the cooperation with local and International development agencies, NGOs and relevant institutions for technical and financial support to implement the adaptation planning in media sector MOINF - GHG Mitigation - Environmental protection - Forest protection - Biodiversity conservation Development of climate change national/ capital/ provincial development plans including an M&E system with specific indicators MOP Climate change adaptation and mitigation and other environmental issues (air pollution, water pollution, waste management, biodiversity, etc.) will be integrated into a single plan Development of a climate change public investment program for the national/capital/ provincial levels MOP Mitigation investment plan Public awareness on climate investment and fund will be improved Building adaptive and resilient capacity for MRD officers at national and sub-national level for mainstreaming climate change into MRD Contribute to the improvement of rural development work in challenging environment rural development planning processes and technical design. Build adaptive capacity on climate change for village leaders (Village Development Committees, VDCs) MRD Contribute to rural community development planning and practices in challenging environment Update and implement the Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan (CCCSP) for 2024-2033 Integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and sectoral strategies and plans Enhance institutional capacity on climate change (mitigation, adaptation, policy, strategies, planning, and finance) through awareness raising, training, and advocacy 1 Urban planning tools for climate change mitigation and the urban planning solution in three sub city Urban Strategic Policy 2020.

Three urban planning solutions will be implemented through the toolkit and formulated policy in the case area to reduce GHG emissions from earth construction, resulting in the saving of 2360 tons of CO2 1. 70% of the three urban planning completed by 2025 (unconditional) 2. 100% of the three urban planning completed by 2030 (unconditional) Air pollution reduction, independency in terms of energy generation, improve resilience of urban planning through access high technical motivation 1. Costs: for policy formulation is 2.5 million 2. Costs: for three urban planning solution is 25 million Technology is available, but it needs to have complemented from international places 2 Improvement of process performance of EE by establishment of energy management in buildings/industries Implementation of energy audit and enforcement of industries to adopt energy management standards 0.1 MtCO2e/year 1. Conduct the mandatory energy audits for companies with an annual energy consumption of more than prescribed within the laws/regulation 2. Voluntary scheme for other companies, especially for SMEs to reduce 10% in 2030 USD 50 million USD 60 million Implementation of international standards such as 50001 3 Efficiency energy and pollution management in latex and rubber wood processing CCPAP 2016-2020 NA Piloting and establishment one completed demonstration local factory for latex and rubber timber processing (energy saving, pollution free, less chemical input, and improve quantity and quality of raw products) Energy saving, reduce GHG and pollution from waste water, health and environment friendy, increased income and value added and employment, and safety working environment USD 1,158,000 It is expected trained latex and wood processors will contribute to climate change impact through waste water treatment and biogas capture technology. Safety working environment and pollution free.

Waste water treatment plant and biogas capture technology, latex processing, wood processing, timber treatment, 5 New sanitary landfills with LFG extraction and LFG extraction at the Dangkor Landfill Potential for private sector engagement in financing, constructing, and operating sanitary landfill and LFG systems 1. PPCA conditional short-term and mid-to long term target (2035) 2. CSDG indicator 11.6 .1 3. National Waste Strategy Objective C 4. CCCSP strategy 1f and 4 GHG emission reductions due to avoidance of anaerobic decomposition of organic waste in landfills & dumpsites. - 1.12 MtCO2e or 1 MtCO2e in case action #2 composting is implemented in 2030 - Dangkor Landfill potential is around 0.14 to 0.16 MtCO2e /year in 2020 This action aims to increase the share of waste disposed at sanitary landfills with LFG extraction from 0% in 2020 to 50% by 2030 and extract LFG from the Dangkor Landfill Conditional NDC action: Cumulative 2020-2030 investment in sanitary landfills: USD 664 million for flaring and USD 788 million including electricity generator (excluding land acquisition) Estimated accrued income in the period of 2020-2030: 1. Electricity sales: USD 69.8 million 2. Carbon revenues: USD 25.97 million based on USD 5/carbon credit) Gender diversity target: 40-60% of workforce are female at all levels (workers to middle and executive managers) National Waste Strategy B (recycling + Strategy A (Separation) - PPCA Action Area 2-2 (Recycling Organic Waste) GHG emission reductions due to avoidance of anaerobic decomposition of organic waste in landfills & dumpsites. -If 10% of all MSW generated is composted by 2030 then up to 0.5 MtCO2e/year of GHG emissions can be avoided by 2030 (depending on BAU and operational practices during composting).

Increasing share of total MSW generated that is composted from 2% in 2016 to 10% by 2030.

Job creation 1. Reduced odour nuisance 2. Local organic fertilizer production 3. Less leachate leakage from landfill 4. Less landfill space required, so cost-savings (but space required for composting) Conditional NDC action: 1. A one-time Investment cost (CAPEX): From USD 40-60 per annual tonne for windrow/static pile composting to USD 300-500 per annual tonne for in-vessel composting. 2. Operating costs: at least USD 32 per tonne for static pile composting.

Sale of local fertilizer (compost) 1. Implementation of quality standards required, so that produced compost has the right quality (no pollutants) and can be sold. 2. Basic quality of compost can be sold for USD 120 per tonne.

Available in Cambodia (e.g. COMPED and CSARO are operating a composting facilities) Gender equality will be promoted by implementing good practices and involving women at all locations where the actions will be implemented. Women will play a crucial role in composting activities at household scale as traditionally women are more involved in cooking activities. Target:

1. National Waste Strategy B (recycling + Strategy A (Separation) 2. PPCA Action Area 2-2 (Recycling Organic Waste) 1. GHG emission reductions due to avoidance of anaerobic decomposition of organic waste in landfills & dumpsites. 2. GHG ER for composting => see 5. 3. GHG ER from RDF + anaerobic digestion <0.2 MtCO2e/year 1. Job creation 2. Reduced odour nuisance 3. local organic fertilizer production (bioslurry) 4. less leachate leakage from landfill 5. less landfill space required Sale of surplus electricity to EdC - Sale of RDF: USD 25/ton - Sales of slurry/compost (quality standards required) Promote gender equality and workers safety (health) situation by implementing good practices Target: 40 to 60% of ppl involved are womens 1. PPCA action area 2 SDG indicator 12.5 2. Sub-Decree on Solid Waste Management (SSWM) 3. The national strategy on 3R for waste management in Cambodia 1. GHG reduction due to reduced amount of plastic waste generated and burned. GHG reduction due to recycling of paper / wood 2. GHG emissions reduction 0.42 MtCO2e/year Achieving a recycle process with an environmental and economic purpose contributes to the goal of the environment and sustainability 1. Low cost for promoting awareness/campaign for public participation 2. High cost for recycling plastic (USD 4,000/ton) 1. In-country recycling will have significant economic benefits 2. Reduction of waste to be landfilled Proportion of young women engages in waste management education. 50% of women will benefit from this action.

9 Bio-digesters construction (85% reduction compared to 2000)(Small size (2-3- 4m3); Medium size(6-8- 10m3), Large size(>10m3) NSDP 2019-2023; ASDP 2019-2023; Strategic Planning Framework for Livestock 2016 - 2025 Methane (CH4) = sum ((n small scale*EFs) +(n mediunscale * EFm)+(n big scale * EFb)); the convert to C02 (using GWP); 4m3 = 4ton CO2e USD 12,750,000 Benefit in term of gas or fuel-wood reduction (250 USD/4m3plant /year/HH and get slurry (1,5- 2,0t/4m3plant/HH) Develop an acceptable and suitable biodigester for farmers and farms; Develop an effective bio- slurry for safe crop garden/farms to supply markets - The GHG benefit targeted from the action is 0.12 MtCO2e from 2021-2030 at an average of 0.01 MtCO2e/year Accurate data generated on garment waste profile, quantity and management-50% of suitable garment waste captured for recycling Indicative capital investment cost in the range of USD 2-3 million which includes collection trucks, warehouse, conveyor belts, shredder/grinder, compactors/moulders. This cost will vary depending on the final technologies selected.Operational costs will mostly consist of truck diesel (most garment companies are in the Phnom Penh area), labour and electricity.

Income derived from waste collection fees and selling the products, as well as seeking financial support from well- established international buyers.

Gender equality will be an important part of the project and strongly promoted. Many women work as waste pickers at the landfills and creating job opportunities in safer environments would be a central element of such project. Women represent 85% of garment manufacturing employees and their knowledge and technical know-how will be tapped in for assessing recycling options.

The total cost will depend on the number of factories targeted. Installing a new system is a net cost, but a basic system can be installed relatively cost effectively for SMEs. Improvements of existing systems will be done according to cost benefits analysis, aiming to work with factories that will save money. Overall, It could be aimed to set up a finance vehicle of USD 5-10 mn to support factories with co- financing.

Gender equality will be an important part of the project and strongly promoted. Many women work in factories. Furthermore, they are likely to be more exposed by the direct discharge of IWW in local waterways as they are primarily responsible for cooking and washing.

12 Application of electrical equipment labelling & MEPS (Lighting, Cooling & Equipment) USD 250 million USD 280 million Labelling of electrical regulated appliances Comply with MEPS for electrical regulated appliances Require private sectors (Producer, Importer, Retailers) to be engaged and to comply with MEPS 1. Investments in energy efficiency are seen more favourably to decrease energy consumption 2. Creation of both in relation to the use of energy efficient appliances, as well as concerning the features of the buildings 0.03 Mt CO2e/year Providing the necessary fundamentals to understand energy efficiency issues when in professional practice to reduce 2% in 2030. The approximate number of awareness programmes scheduled for a year? (25 programmes) 1. Reducing inefficient appliances/technologies uses 2. Informing the citizens of possibilities to improve EE and of related benefits USD 20 million USD 32 million 1. Develop curriculum for educational institutions 2. Social media to promote saving activities and preparation and broadcasting of a documentary film on Sustainable Energy 14 Building codes and enforcement/certification for new buildings and those undergoing major renovation 1. Reduce 10% of electricity consumption in 2030 2. kWh/m2 reduction of energy demand in new buildings /buildings undergoing major renovation Energy efficiency standards, laws and regulations concerning building energy codes are being elaborated and promulgated USD 25 million USD 40 million Information needed to improve energy efficiency in building designs Enforcement of efficient electrical transformers/motors in utilities /buildings/ industries which reduces electricity consumption Resolve of economic viability of investing in the improvement of energy efficiency of the equipment USD 16 million USD 21 million Request to comply with new high- efficiency electric motors 16 Improve sustainability of charcoal production through enforcement of regulations 30% Conditional Incentives for green charcoal companies to be able to compete with traditional charcoal Strengthen climate- resilient energy through electricity infrastructure improvement in order to respond to climate related disasters.

1. Increase energy access to 80% by 2020 2. Increase energy access to 85% by 2025 3. 90% by 2030 Local community has electricity 24 hours.

USD 40 million USD 55 million 1. Solar Home System (SHS) 2. DC Micro grid 3. AC Micro grid Solar Battery Charging station 18 Roadmap study on Integration of renewable energy resources (solar, wind, hydro, biomass) into energy mix 25 % of RE source into power mix (generation capacity) by 2030 (solar, wind, hydro and biomass) USD 300,000 USD 600,000 1. Solar PV 2. Onshore wind 3. Dam reservoir / run river 4. Waste to Energy 19 Diversification of household and community energy generation sources to reduce reliance on biomass as an energy sources 20 Reducing GHG emission though off grid street lightening of rural municipality CCCSP 2014-2023: 1. Leverage the decentralization process to strengthen financial and institutional processes for local adaptation 2. Mainstream climate change into national and sub-national development plans and the NSPS Reducing GHG emission though energy consumption of street lightening of the rural municipality 10 Sangkat of Senmonorom Municipality, Kep Municipality, and Preah Sihanuk Municipality integration of climate change into financial management, institutional arrangement and policy reform by 2028 1. Improve knowledge of local governance on impact of climate change will lead to mitigate GHG emission 2. NCDD will also implement ESS, Gender, M&E along with climate action USD 10 million USD 15 million 1. Climate change governance 2. Climate vulnerability and impact assessment for 5 target Sangkat 3. National Green Growth Policy CCCSP 2014-2023: 1. Leverage the decentralization process to strengthen financial and institutional processes for local adaptation 2. Mainstream climate change into national and sub-national development plans and the NSPS Reducing GHG emission though green city planning and ecofriendly habitant.

5 Sangkat of Battambang municipality integration of green city, and ecofriendly into financial management, institutional arrangement and policy reform by 2025 1. Improve knowledge of local governance on impact of climate change will lead to mitigate GHG emission 2. NCDD will also implement ESS, Gender, M&E along with climate action) Paradam shif USD 8 million USD 15 million 1. Climate change governance 2. Climate vulnerability and impact assessment for 5 target Sangkat 3. National Green Growth Policy 22 Eco-payment based on changing behavior on fire wood use of community in Angkor and Kulen Conservation Park CCCSP 2014- 2023:a) Leverage the decentralization process to strengthen financial and institutional processes for local adaptation) Mainstream climate change into national and sub- national development plans and the NSPS Reducing GHG emission though avoiding the extraction of the forest from Angkor conservation park and Kulen conservation park for housing, fire wood consumption, and agriculture land.

20 communes of Prasat Bakong district, Kulen District, Norkor Krav District, and Banteay Srey District, of Siem Reap Province integration of climate change into financial management, institutional arrangement and policy reform by 2030 1. Improve knowledge of local governance on impact of climate change will lead to mitigate GHG emission 2. NCDD will also implement ESS, Gender, M&E along with climate action USD 7 million USD 15 million 1. Climate change governance 2. Climate vulnerability and impact assessment for 5 target Sangkat 3. National Green Growth Policy 4. Performance based climate resilient grant 1. MME Standards & Labelling for cooling appliances (DRAFT) 2. MOE Guidelines for Green Building (DEVELOPING) 3. MME (with EU and ADB) Energy Efficiency Policy (DRAFT) Without stronger measures to encourage the uptake of more efficient units, IEA estimates that rising electricity demand from cooling alone is projected to require around 200 GW of additional generation capacity in 2040 and cooling could be responsible for as much as 30% share in the ASEAN regions peak electricity demand. Deploying more efficient ACs, along with other efficient equipment and building efficiency improvements, would permit ASEAN countries to save 110 TWh of electricity by 2040. This NDC action aims to implement climate-friendly cooling in public buildings to reduce GHG emissions: The adoption of climate-friendly cooling across all Cambodian public sector buildings would result in 0.04 MtCO2e reductions against BAU per year.

The National Policy, Strategy and Action Plan on Energy Efficiency in Cambodia (MIME 2013), Basic Energy Plan (2019), The National Policy on Green Growth and the National Strategic Plan on Green Growth 2013-2030 and Industrial Development Policy 2015-2025.

Technology transfer in key industrial sub- sectors which are process heat intensive: bricks, food and beverage Conditional Possibility for youth engagement related to factories, retailers, technology vendors etc. Private sector involvement through factories, GMAC, retailers, ESCOs and technology vendors Improving energy productivity, reducing ambient temperatures through ventilation and cooling optimization and decreasing fugitive heat losses from steam and compressed air delivery systems Each efficient boiler is estimated at USD 60,000 cost.

In monetary terms, savings represent USD 13.2 million in avoid wood biomass cost at an average value of USD 40.61/ton.

1.2: Sewing machine GHG emission reduction is estimated at 0.002 MtCO2e/year for 3,500 new electric machines.

Each efficient sewing machine is estimated at USD 200.

In monetary terms, electricity savings represent USDk 468 in a year, at an average electricity cost USD 0.1475/kWh.

1.3: Washing machine GHG emission reduction is estimated at 0.0002 MtCO2e/year for 130 new washing machines Each efficient washing machine is estimated at USD 3,500.

In monetary terms, electricity savings represent USDk 34.8 in a year, at an average electricity cost USD 0.1475/kWh. 1.4: Drying machine GHG emission reduction is estimated at 0.0001 MtCO2e/year for 65 new drying machines.

Each efficient drying machine is estimated at USD 3,500.

In monetary terms, electricity savings represent USDk 17.4 in a year, at an average electricity cost USD 0.1475/kWh. 1.5: Compressors GHG emission reduction is estimated at 0.0007 MtCO2e/year for 40 new compressors.

Each compressor is estimated at USD 20,000.

Introducing 40 compressors will save 693 MWh/year electricity, totaling 6,930 MWh by 2030. (40 compressors x 17.3 MWh x 10 years) - GHG emission reduction is estimated at 0.005 MtCO2e/year for 150,000 new efficient lightning appliances.

Each lightbulb is estimated at USD16.

In monetary terms, electricity savings represent USDk 730 in a year, at an average electricity cost USD 0.1475/kWh Improving brick kiln efficiency can improve the safety of brick kiln operation through implementation of better safety features that reduce risk of injury during loading of fuel and handling of bricks. Reducing the toxicity and amount of emission pollutants coming from brick kilns is also an expected benefit to implementing energy efficient technology.

Roughly estimated GHG emission reductions: 0.03 MtCO2eq/year for 8 rotary kiln replacing same amount of boat kilns.

Each rotary efficient kiln is estimated at USD 200,000 cost.

In monetary terms, savings represent USD 1.57 million in avoid wood biomass cost each year, at an average value of USD 40.61/ton.

Roughly estimated GHG emission reductions: 0.01 MtCO2e/year for 6 rotary kiln replacing same amount of modified boat kilns.

Each rotary efficient kiln is estimated at USD 200,000 cost.

In monetary terms, savings represent USDk 700 in avoided wood biomass cost each year, at an average value of USD 40.61/ton.

Improving energy productivity, reducing ambient temperatures through ventilation and cooling optimization and decreasing fugitive heat losses from steam and compressed air delivery systems Roughly estimated GHG emission reductions: 0.02 MtCO2e/year for 17 highly efficient boiler replacing same amount of low efficient units.

One efficient boiler is estimated at USD 37,000 cost.

In monetary terms, savings represent USDk 830 in avoid wood biomass cost each year, at an average value of USD 40.61/ton.

4.1: Replace an LPG fired boiler consuming about 704,428 L/year with a biomass-residues fired boiler in a Food Import and Export company 4.2: Replace a diesel-fired dynamo with grid electricity at a milling factory; the diesel dynamo is consuming 12 liters/hour operating for 8 hours/day, 20 days/month Installation of new additional biomass residue briquette- based boiler equipped with gas treatment system, USD 33,850 4.3: Improve operations at a noodles manufacturing unit to reduce the usage of one boiler from existing four- boiler system Switch to new system for collective distribution using 3 boilers instead of 4 independent boilers.

4.4: Install a system to collect and re-use waste steam and hot water from meat steamer, resulting in about 524 m3/year of fuelwood saving 1. The Forest Law of 2002 2. National REDD+ Strategy (NRS) 2017- 2021 3. National Forest Program 2010-2029 4. Industrial Development Policy 2015-2025 1. 6000 ha of timber plantations established between 2021-2030 2. 1800 ha of firewood plantations established between 2021-2030 Further evaluations have to be carried out to set a quantified target for this action. Achieving the defined target will be highly dependent on availability of climate finance, including both public and private sources, to conduct and scale up the defined activities. Linked government actions in the forestry value chain that incentivize demand side investment, such as reducing the availability and hence pushing up the cost of unsustainable fuel wood, is key to achieving the defined targets. Accessing climate finance associated with forest preservation to fund demand side interventions is a necessary barrier to overcome to scale factory investment that affect unsustainable wood fuel production.

Challenges with selection of appropriate variety of fuelwood and lands for sustainable fuelwood production Children, especially girls, and women will benefit from this action by reducing the amount of distance they have to extract fuelwood.

Integration of the Kigali Amendment to Montreal Protocol mandated F-gas transition plans with plans to improve cooling efficiency and access to cooling. NCAP and its roadmap to support the adoption of Enhanced MEPS for cooling appliances and improve existing energy policies.

Emissions  1.09 MtCO2e emissions by 2030 Direct GHG Emissions reduction  0.17 MtCO2e emissions Indirect GHG emissions reduction  0.92MtCO2e Enhanced MEPS and F-gas transition for room air conditioners and residential refrigerators targeting the new & existing equipment stock in the country.

Improvement in affordability and access to cooling for the population Improvement in local R&D and manufacturing Enhancement of customer trust and promotion of new & local market players Generation of jobs and boost in economy Costs: USD 50 million Benefits: Total cumulative savings after 10 years of implementation USD 1,320 Million through energy savings by 2030 (Considering USD 50 million investment and 10 years cumulative electricity savings of 6.1 TWh through NCAP) Low GWP refrigerants like R1234yf, R32, CO2, Hydrocarbons, etc., High Seasonal Energy Efficiency Room Air conditioners Climate adaptive and energy efficient refrigerators 27 Inclusion of performance requirements of passive cooling systems in building energy code of Cambodia Environment and Natural Resources Code, which has a chapter on Sustainable Cities, making it a requirement for the capital city and cities over 200,000 people to develop a Green City Strategic Plan and identify green city development projects.

Improved air quality, more jobs and better economy, better energy security and grid reliability Envelope insulation, high performance glazing, Insulated door/window frames, air- tightness, shading, ventilation, cool roofs 28 Implementation of passive cooling measures in the cities (addressing urban heat island effect [UHIE]), public buildings and commercial buildings.

Environment and Natural Resources Code, which has a chapter on Sustainable Cities, making it a requirement for the capital city and cities over 200,000 people to develop a Green City Strategic Plan and identify green city development projects.

2 cities ( Phnom Penh and Siem Reap) analysed for mitigating UHIE and projects are implemented - 2% of the existing public and commercial buildings are retrofitted with passive cooling measures Health and well-being of the citizens, energy cost savings to the consumers, improved aesthetics, increased productivity of the population, vegetation acting as carbon sinks 1. Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023, 2. NSDP 2019-2023, 3. Rectangular Strategy, 4. National Policy on Green Growth, 5. Sectoral development plans.

30 Enhance maintenance and inspection of vehicle (Piloting maintenance and emission inspections of vehicles) 1. Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023, 2. NSDP 2019-2023, 3. Rectangular Strategy, 4. National Policy on Green Growth and sectoral development plans.

20 or 30 vehicle inspection centers will be in operation by 2030. 1 million vehicles are expected to be inspected by 2030 1. Reduce maintenance cost/saving cost 2. Reduce traffic accident, injury and fatality 3. Reduce air pollution 4. Reduce GHG emission 5. Innovate technology USD 600.00 1. Public and public 2. Private partnership investment opportunity 3. Purchasing/ upgrading the current system 4. Demonstrate the system Benefit 1. Time saving 2. Reduce maintenance cost/saving cost 3. Reduce traffic accident, injury and fatality 4. Reduce air pollution and GHG Technology is unavailable and costly; however, the originated country is seeking for/requiring assistant from foreign country. Lack of experts and staffs need to be trained.

Baseline: 09 vehicles(battery vehicle) are registered by 2020;

34 Increasing the effectiveness and sustainability of agricultural land management techniques (Conservation Agriculture) Sustainable land management, reduce emission from burned agriculture residue, protect soil from erosion USD 24,963,000 Reduce emission and soil erosion, increase soil organic carbon andvicrop yield Conservation agriculture; Minimum tillage, mulching with crop residue, and crop rotation; legum growing;

35 Organic input agriculture and bio-slurry; and deep placement fertilizer technology NA 10 provinces Reduce of chemical fertilizer utilization, contribution to mitigate the greenhouse gases, reduce production cost and pollution, and soil improvement USD 2.6 million Reduce production cost and pollution from chemical fertilizer, sustainable land management 36 Promote fodder production to improve high nutrient rich and high-quality forage feed value agriculture by- products technology to support cattle production NSDP 2019-2023; ASDP 2019-2023; Strategic Planning Framework for Livestock 2016 - 2025 NA 1year/1ha/province Increase soil organic carbon, Enhanced adoption by farmers of improved fodder technology has significantly increased animals production and household income;

37 Promote manure Management through compost making process to reduce carbon emission NSDP 2019-2023; ASDP 2019-2023; Strategic Planning Framework for Livestock 2016 - 2025 Increase GAHP Good Animals Health Practice enhanced adoption by improving animal farms and slaughterhouses; household USD 21.25 million reduce environment pollution from Farms and slaughterhouses and household Long term USD 1 /seedling; medium plan USD 0.5/seedling ; Fast growing USD 0,3/ per seedling Royal Government of Cambodia labels tourism sector as Green Gold. Tourism is a non-smoke industry which import in places.

Baseline: 5 locations Kompong Speu 20,000 tree Kratie (Kosh Trong) 5,000 trees Kompot (Kompong Samaki) 500,000 and other locations approximately is 500,00 Target: 25 locations covering all provinces/city Reducing natural disaster, job creation for local people, poverty alleviation, social welfare improvement, cultural and environmental conservation, protecting biodiversity.

USD 2 million USD 2.5 million Public toilet, education signboard, billboard, rubbish bin etc. The M&E system will be aligned with National Monitoring and Evaluation Framework for Climate Change. Encouraging women, elderly, children, poorest to involve, they might understand and support new mindset that would provide (for adaptation projects).

Small unconditional for planting tree, state-public land Conditional to support community for developing and maintain/care tree 1. Private sector could join by in- kind and cash to support the activity. 2. Private sector and community could take benefits 41 2. Practicing responsible travel manner in order to protect and conserve environment, biodiversity, culture and local livelihood improvement Conditional MoT will closely work with travel agencies and private sector to promote those relevant guidelines.

Conditional Private would provide bags, re-fill bottle water, support recycle shops or association. Provide big bottle water for refilling. 43 4. Reducing energy use, improving energy efficiency, increasing the use of renewable energy, carbon offsetting, waste management and recycling, and water conservation Emission reduction: 1- Be more activities from tourists including; adventure, cycling, walking, hiking, Stop using car, bus, van and other vehicle by using gas/energy into tourist sites by replace of cow cart, ride bicycle, or walking.

Emission reduction: 1- Be more activities from tourists including; adventure, cycling, walking, hiking, Stop using car, bus, van and other vehicle by using gas/energy into tourist sites by replace of cow cart, ride bicycle, or walking.

Emission reduction: 1- Be more activities from tourists including; adventure, cycling, walking, hiking, Stop using car, bus, van and other vehicle by using gas/energy into tourist sites by replace of cow cart, ride bicycle, or walking.

46 Installing air quality monitoring equipment in all provinces across the countries and establishing air quality data monitoring center with mobile application for public information and access 48 Improving urban environmental management through increasing green spaces in the city Agriculture National Committee for Sub- National Democrati c Developm ent (NCDD) CCCSP 2014- 2023: 1. Leverage the decentralization process to strengthen financial and institutional processes for local adaptation 2. Mainstream climate change into national and sub-national development plans and the NSPS Strengthen local agricultural practice to respond to climate hazards through innovation of agroecological technology Baseline is 0. Target: 100,000 by 2026 (with policy intervention the project has the potential to scale-up to 5 million people accounting for 30% of total population) 1. Climate Change mitigation as the project considering of low-carbon agricultural technology 2. Improved new management approach in agroecosystem 3. NCDD will also implement ESS, Gender, M&E along with climate actions according to GCF standards 10,000,000 11,000,000 1. 10 elements of agroecology by FAO 2. GCF funding modalities and investment criteria standards 3. NCDD accreditation standards 2 (Program 1: Improvement of Agricultural Productivity and Diversification and Agri-Business) Development of rice crops for increase production, improved quality- safety; harvesting and post harvesting technique and agro- business enhancement Increase rice productivity, reduce loss during and post harvesting and improve rice quality, safety.

Promote climate- friendly Agri- business rice value chain and profit in rice production value chains. Mitigating impact of rice farming on environment Stress tolerant varieties, Agriculture(CSA), Sustainable Rice Platform (SRP),Good Agricultural Practices (GAP), Organic Agriculture, ISNM, Integrated Pest management (IPM), water saving techniques, System of Rice Intensification (SRI), Complex Rice System (for example duck- rice farming), Agroforestry, on- farm seed conservation and selection technics and post- harvests technologies, Sustainable landscape management (land levelling, integrated micro- watershed management).

Enhance women's economic empowerment and promote the participation of women in decision-process within the value chain, with emphasize on post- harvesting opportunities and agro-business (incl. women in Rice ACs, capacity development for leadership roles within ACs etc.). Ensure women's meaningful and active participation in capacity development and opportunities. This requires gender related targets such as, (1) equal representation of women and men (50% women) participate in stakeholder consultations; (2) 35% (suggest this could be 50% to be equal with men) of the total project beneficiaries of extension services, training and inputs are female farmers, and (3) 50% of women beneficiaries self-report a reduction in their work burden as a result of project activities At least 35% of female- farmers (including female- headed households) will benefit from relevant trainings, access to resources, extension services taking into account their work burdens.

Youth represents 47.1% in agriculture sectors. They will be engaged in capacity development, technology transfer in relation to sustainable agriculture including Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA), Good Agriculture Practice (GAP), and pre and post-harvest techniques. Youth will be strongly involved in Sustainable Rice Platform (SRP), and Agriculture Cooperative (ACs), enterprise development and agro-business activities to ensure food security and income generation among the youth groups.

3 Development of horticulture and other food crops for increase production, improved quality- safety; harvesting and post harvesting technique and agro- business enhancement Increase horticulture production and productivity and profit in horticulture production value chains through using tress tolerant varieties and CSA practices and increasing resilience to climate change. Fostering local chemical free produced vegetable value chains by improving sustainable water management practices, promoting diversification to increase food security, access to healthy food and diversified income opportunities resilient to climate change.

Baseline: 70% in 2020 Target: Increased supply of vegetable 2% /year to local market 47.1% of youth who involved in agriculture sectors, will be provided capacity development, technology transfer in various form of sustainable agriculture including Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA), Sustainable Rice Platform (SRP) and Good Agriculture Practice (GAP). Youth will be strongly involved in pre and post-harvest technology, and Agriculture Cooperative (ACs), Enterprise development and other agro-business enhancement to ensure food security and income generation among the youth groups.

Youth represents 47.1% in agriculture sectors. They will be engaged in capacity development, technology transfer in relation to sustainable agriculture including Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA), Good Agriculture Practice (GAP), and pre and post-harvest techniques. Youth will be strongly involved in Sustainable Rice Platform (SRP), and Agriculture Cooperative (ACs), enterprise development and agro-business activities to ensure food security and income generation among the youth groups.

Promote and engagement of private sector including investors/input suppliers, exporters, and SME/ entrepreneurs to be involved in the horticulture value chains that can boost multiple and double cropping to adapt with climate variability; particularly in dry season for smallholders and medium farmers aiming to improve food security and income generation.

4 Development of Industry crops for increase in production, improved quality- safety; harvesting and post harvesting technique and agro- business enhancement Increase industry crop productivity and profit in the production value chains through stress-tolerant varieties and CSA practices and increasing resilience to climate change. Diversification will also contribute to increase in income (Land equivalent ratio) and diversification of economic opportunities of farmers to adapt to climate change. Increase in income through improvement in processing technologies.

Promote climate- friendly Agri- business value chain and profit generation boosting local food security through diversification, reduction in soil degradation and greenhouse gas emissions through fostering eco-system services through CSA practices.

Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA), Agroforestry, Integrated Soil and Nutrient Management (ISNM), Integrated Pest Management (IPM), Botanical pesticide production, organic fertilizer, Conservation Agriculture (CA), water saving techniques and post- harvests and processing technologies and improving stress tolerant species and variety selection.

Promote women in collective business and provide relevant technical trainings and capacity building on quality, safety, harvest, post-harvest, financial literacy, enterprise development and processing/packaging skills. At least 50% women are engaged in consultation, planning and decision making process for sustainable landscape management through the application/replicate of the CSA practices, agroforestry, conservation agriculture, etc. Strengthen women's leadership roles and knowledge sharing on women-led success stories women's good practices to improve women's opportunities within the Value Chains and/or sustainable market accessibility which ultimately contribute their increase in income generation and food security. 50% of women beneficiaries report an increase in income generation as a result of improved market accessibility 50% of women beneficiarys report food security through a 12- month period as a result of the project activities.

Youth represents 47.1% in agriculture sectors. They will be engaged in capacity development, technology transfer in relation to sustainable agriculture including Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA), Good Agriculture Practice (GAP), and pre and post-harvest techniques. Youth will be strongly involved in Sustainable Rice Platform (SRP), and Agriculture Cooperative (ACs), enterprise development and agro-business activities to ensure food security and income generation among the youth groups.

Promote private sector players in various phases of industrial crop value chain. They will be involved in support to provide sustainable agriculture practices, techniques and technology transfer, improving water management practices, pre and post-harvest technology, processing (i.e. cashew nut/cassava processing) and certification for market expansion.

5 Improvement of support services and capacity building to crop production resilient to climate change by promoting research, trials and up-scaling climate- smart farming systems that increase resilience to CC and extreme weather events Baseline: Departments of GDA and 12 Seed farms, research stations and development and training centers, selected Agricultural Cooperatives.Targets: Increasing resilience to climate change and natural disasters, and improving resilience facilities, tools and technologies.

Increasing resilience to climate change and natural disasters, and improving resilience facilities, tools and technologies.

69,562,000 10 Departments of GDA, 12 Seed farms research stations and development and training centers, and selected Agricultural Cooperatives.

The private sector players active in capacity development, investment of technology innovation to adapt with the climate sensitivity (i.e. suitable agriculture equipment and machinery), improved access to quality inputs, pre- and post- harvest technologies, processing and marketing.

Sustainable Rice Platform (SRP), and Agriculture Cooperative (ACs), enterprise development and agro-business activities to ensure food security and income generation among the youth groups.

Climate Change Priorities Action Plan for Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Sector 2016-2020 Building the resilience of country cassava production and processing for economic development, human health and environmental sustainability Baseline: N/A Target: Cassava farmers in at least 15 provinces in the country, or more than 0.6 million hectares in cassava production (MAFF, 2018), plus the growing cassava processing industry Mitigation: reduce pollution from processing Environmental: Prevent soil erosion Social: healthy living conditions for people in the cassava production areas 2,890,000 a). Economy of national and cassava farmers improved; b). Land erosion and soil fertility degradation minimized; c). Health of populations living in the cassava processing areas improved 1. Variety improvement program for Cassava Mosaic Virus Disease; 2. Prevention of soil erosion and soil nutrient leaching; 3. Appropriate waste management for cassava processing developed Further analysis on youth involvement in cassava production, capacity and necessary resources is required. Provide capacity building based on the need, ongoing technical support, improve access to resources (financial, inputs, suitable equipment) in cassava production and processing.

Private sectors will be actively participating in capacity development, supply of inputs, improvement processing facilities and technology and exportation.

7 Research for the development and enhancement of agricultural productivity, quality, and transfer through strengthening of crop variety conservation and new crop variety release responding to the impacts of climate change CCPAP 2016- 2020; Strategic plan in respond to the impact of CC 2019-2023; ASDP 2019-2023.; National Demography Policy 2016-2030 Increase and stabilization of crop production through conducting research on plant genetic conservation and utilization, release of new crop varieties with high yield and quality, resistant biotic and abiotic stresses.

Baseline: 38 varieties conserved in 2019 1 new variety released in 2019 (MAFF, 2020) Target: 200 varieties conservation and rejuvenation per year; At least 2 new crop varieties released per year 2,000,000 3,000,000.00 More than 38 crop types/varieties are being conserved in CARDIs gene-bank and on field for long term utilization.; New crop varieties released to respond to climate change ; new crop varieties with high yielding and quality, resistant to biotic and abiotic stresses.

More than 50% of youths (who are involved in the proposed priorities for agricultural development sector) will be engaged to participate in new technology development and distribution. They include students, researchers, scientists, sellers and farmers.

It is important to work with all stakeholders such as farmers agricultural communities, agricultural cooperatives, SME, and Cambodian rice milling association.

8 Development of new technologies and increased yields by using new crop varieties which adapt to climate change CCPAP 2016- 2020; Strategic plan in respond to the impact of CC 2019-2023; ASDP 2019-2023.; National Demography Policy 2016-2030 Technology package for rice crop diversification; New upland soil classification and fertilizer recommendations; Land erosion, degradation, and soil fertility management in lowland and upland areas Baseline: NA Target: At least 5 types of new technologies developed responding to climate change Women will be engaged to participate in research and technology development. More than 50% of female farmers will benefit from capacity building and extension services in particular new technologies on crop diversification, variety selection of stress tolerant crops, and soil fertilities management in low and upland areas, pre and post- harvest technology.

More than 50% of youths (who are involved in the proposed priorities for agriculture development sector) will be engaged to participate in new technology development and distribution. They include students, researchers, scientists, sellers and farmers.

All stakeholders including farmer agricultural communities, agricultural cooperatives, SME, and Cambodian rice milling association will be engaged to be involved in developing new technologies, facilities to develop, test and demonstrate the resilience of crop varieties.

9 Development of rubber clone varieties suitable for AEZ and resilient to climate change Resilient rubber clone varieties suitable for AEZ in Cambodia for sustainable production and reduced maintaining cost.Rubber clone trial and experimental to produces best accessions variety by AEZ in term of resilient, good yield and rubber quality.Carbon sequestration and contribute to sound ecological function.

Baseline: 363 farmers trained in 2019 (DGR, 2019)Target: 3, 500 trained planter in 5 AEZ; at least 1 new clone variety developed Maintain and improved rubber production and provide employment;Improv ement of rubber plant genetic and fully scientifically documented;Increas ed revenue by reduced maintaining cost; Mitigation as rubber plantation requested CO2e 9,248,600 $13,872,900.00 Horticulture, Cloning and breeding, Plantation trial and analysis, Land suitability, soil improvement.

Ensure the engagement of at least 80 % of youth involved in the rubber production in capacity development including development rubber clone variety that are suitable for AEZ and resilient to climate change.

Private sector will be engaged in capacity development and adopt/using clone technology after training. The private sectors will be supported with rubber seeds that are suitable for AEZ and resilient to climate change.

10 Enhancing institutional and capacity development on climate change impact, vulnerability assessment, adaption measures and mitigation related to rubber sector Overcome the unique challenges of rubber involved in responding to climate change it must be able to act on foresight, learn and adapt, build collaborative coalitions for action through research and/or enhance existing GAP subjective to rubber plantation practices.

Baseline: 171 sub- national/extension workers trained in 2019. Target: 5 permanent sample plots (PSP) equipped with mini weather stations; 150 well trained national technical staff, 1500 extension worker, and 30 rubber small holder association; Support to sub- national level 20 times.

3,852,000 $5,778,000.00 PSP (permanent sample plot) establishment, data recording and analyses technique; Good Agricultural Practices (GAP), Agroforestry, sustainable land management.

Ensure the engagement of at least 80 % of youth involving in the rubber production in capacity development specifically on climate change vulnerability impact assessment, improvement of adaptation and mitigation measure related to rubber production.

Private sector will be involved in capacity development, planning to improve the effectiveness of adaptation measures and mitigation actions related to the rubber sector.

11 (Program 2: Promote animal production and animal health) Improvement of animal breeding technology in Cambodia through AI which can adapt to climate change Baseline: Animal breed production: 338 of Cattle breeds produced and 123347 of piglets produced in 2019. Meat production 239,115 tones in 2019 (MAFF, 2020) Target: Increase animal breed by 3%/year and meat production by 3% for 25 provinces/ year 12,500,000 Increase animals production and meat by 3%/year; At least 1,611,646 households keeping, raising livestock will benefit from the prioritized activities in 5 different AEZs (RGC,2013) At least 23% of beneficiaries will be female-farmers will be involved in various capacities in the development of animal breeding technologies and genetic management of animal production. They will be also engaged in animal management technology, feeding, grazing and disease management, improvement of access information, services, engagement in the roles of livestock commercialization and livestock production.

Youth represent 5% in animal production. They will be supported in capacity building and animal breeding technology to adapt to climate change. Youth engagement will be promoted through whole process of animal production value chain.

12 Promotion of research capacities on animal genetic, animal breeding, and animal feed is strengthened to adapt to climate change Strengthened research skills and Improved breeding technologies; improved vaccination.

Baseline: 16,199,864 of animal received vaccines in 2019 (MAFF, 2020) Target: get 1 vaccination after 10 years; Vaccines to reach 77%/year Animal Breeding and Feeding (AI technique, Fodder Programme), cooling systems, de-worming and vaccine programmes, Animal disease surveillance) 40% of youth (animal raisers) will be engaged in research and development of animal genetic, animal breeding and animal feeding technologies (i.e. AI technology, fodder programme), cooling systems, deworming and vaccine programmes to adapt to climate change.

The private sector will play important role in replicating and piloting the technologies including improvement in animal breeding, AI technologies, cooling systems, deworming, vaccine programmes, animal disease surveillance and fodder programmes.

Animal Health and Production cooperatives establishment and Technical guidelines for animal health and production set up, Integration with farming systems based on animal production is expanded Baseline: NA Target: 5 Animal Health and Production cooperatives/year (150 persons/year) Animal breed and waste trustable and acceptable technology to farmers and cooperatives 5% of youth involved in animal production will be supported on capacity development particularly on risk reduction, preparedness and response to climate shocks as well as technology transfer, knowledge and skills on early warning systems and disease management. They will be also be engaged in collective businesses, enterprise development, financial accessibility and market linkage.

Promote capacity development, and technical response for risk prevention and reduction. The private sector will be also promoted to support climate adaptation measures to mobilize financial resources and technical capacity, leverage the efforts of governments, engage civil society and community efforts, and develop innovative climate services and adaptation technologies.

14 (Program 3: Fishery management and aquaculture development ) Promoting aquaculture production systems and practices that are more adaptive to climate change Joint Monitoring Indicators (JMIs) 2019-2023; Climate Change Priorities Action Plan for Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Sector 2016-2020 Increase adaptation, strengthen livelihoods and safeguard food and nutrition security of small-scale fishermen Baseline: 307,408 tons (MAFF, 2020)Target: Increased aquaculture yields by 20% annually Develop aquaculture system increase production, enhance livelihoods related to food and nutrition security, reduce fishing pressure on fisheries resources 15,600,000 4,700,00026,49 6 households will be engaged in aquaculture production and benefits (RGC, 2013) (i) Domesticate and produce both indigenous and exotic species that are more adaptable to climate change;(ii) Promote aquaculture in plastic ponds and composite ponds; (iii) Promote cage and pen culture in man-made reservoirs 50% of beneficiaries in improved aquaculture production are women50% of women report improved access to markets50% of beneficiaries of in farm and out farm activities are women 65.5% of youth involved in aquaculture will be engaged in construction and operations of fishponds, fish hatching, and fish marketing. They will receive support in term of technical training and capacity development in collective business, development of fishponds, hatchery facilities, selecting of brood stock, transferring, feed preparation, harvest and post- harvest technology and marketing.

Private sector engagement/cooperat ion in fisheries product and food safety in response to climate change and disaster risk reduction. They will be strongly engaged in the process of capacity development, input supplies (i.e. feed), trading and processing technologies and marketing.

Joint Monitoring Indicators (JMIs) 2019-2023; Climate Change Priorities Action Plan for Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Sector 2016-2020 Sustainable use of fisheries resources and Increase adaptation, strengthen livelihoods and safeguard food and nutrition security Baseline: 0? Capture fisheries production from all sources sustained to around 600,000 metric tons annually Develop fishes and aquatic habitats, sustain fish yields, strengthen food and nutrition security 33,500,000 53,000,000 680,311 households engaged with fishing activities will benefit from the intervention (RGC,2013) (i)Dredging and rehabilitation of fish refuges and critical habitats; (ii) Protection of flooded and mangrove forests as the spawning, nursing and feeding habitats for fish and other aquatic animal 30% of youth involved in fishery sector will be engaged in consultation meetings, engaging sustainable fishery management and protection the critical habitats and mangroves and flooded forests.

Private sector will be engaged in protection of flooded forests and reforestation activities for example with the incentives for ecosystem services certification scheme or as a part of Social Corporative Responsibilities activities.

16 Scaled up climate resilient agricultural production through increased access to solar irrigation systems and other climateresilient practices INDC: Developing climate-proof agriculture systems for adapting to change in water variability to enhance crop yields Strengthen the adaptive capacities of smallholder farmers and coastal communities, especially women and most vulnerable groups, to cope with impacts of climate change induced challenges on their livelihoods as well as on water- energy- food security.

Baseline: 0 30 communes of 7 provinces namely Takeo, Pursat, Battambang, Siem Reap, Kampong Thom, Kandal and Prey Veng with integration of climate change into financial management, institutional arrangement and policy reform by 2030 1. GHG emission reduction through solar irrigation 2. NCDD will also implement ESS, Gender, M&E along with climate actions according to GCF standards Will be important to engage with the private sector in the agriculture and energy sectors to ensure adequate capacity.

17 Developing a training manual and providing training on approaches for development of climate-smart and sustainable livelihood to rural poor people Baseline: 0 2,000 Rural poor People (Poor 1, & Poor 2).

Adaptive capacity of rural poor people will contribute to livelihood promotion and environmentally friendly Poor villagers will change their behavior and attitudes in working hard for their betterment of their livelihoods and communities Lessons learnt and best practice from other countries can be applied.

In poor villagers both men and women participate in training program . Target: 50% of program beneficiaries are women 18 Protection, risk mitigation, and resilience building from marine pollution particularly caused by activities on land including marine pollution from waste and aquaculture activities.

NSDP Effective coastal zone management resilience to climate change as well as projection of other impacts that caused by human activities Mitigation: reduce GHG emission from waste in ocean Biodiversity of marine resources 19 Effective management and protection of ecological systems of marine and costal zones to avoid adverse impacts from various factors, build their resilience and restore its functions for productive and healthy oceans NSDP Resilience of coastal zone through restoration of its functions that will reduce the impacts from different factors including climate change Main function and services of marine and coastal zone ecological system is protected and restored by 2030 % of flooded forest and mangrove which will be restored and protected GHG emission reduction through restoration of mangrove and improvement of ocean capacity to capture the carbon from atmosphere 20 Upgrading curriculum and training methodologies, including libraries, to include climate change subjects for primary schools Strengthen resilience through education in order to respond to related climate disasters by: 1. Developing the supplementary documents for supporting teaching and learning at school levels.2. Increase nationwide Eco- school.3. Integrate CC into Khmer, Science and Social study subjects.

1. Develop and implement the supplementary documents (from primary to secondary)2. Increase the Eco-school from 10 to 1000 schools.3. At least 8000 schools across the country will increase awareness about CC thought Khmer, Science and Social study subjects Students shall understand:1. Climate change mitigation2. Pollution.3. Biodiversity 4. Environment conservation5. 5Rs.

2,000,000 2,500,000 Textbook ratio for primary, lower secondary and upper secondary schools Increase percentage of girls for:1. Enrollment rate2. Promotion rateTarget: 47.9% for girls by 2023 Textbook publication- unconditional (National budget partners)Others: Conditional Students shall understand: 1. Climate change mitigation 2. Pollution 3. Biodiversity 4. Environment conservation 5. 5Rs.

Increase percentage of girls for: 1. Enrollment rate 2. Promotion rate Target: 30% for girls by 2023 Textbook publication- unconditional (National budget+partners) Others: Conditional 22 Build centers of excellence for delivering climate change courses and research among Universities 1. Strengthen climate-resilience education through innovation, research and data management center. 2. Document lessons learn and best practices for climate resilience development to share among practitioners Baseline: 1 Target: 3 centers of excellences in 2023 as mentioned in the ESP target and increase to 7 in 2030 1. Climate change mitigation 2. Pollution reduction 3. Biodiversity 4. Environment conservation 5. 5Rs.

Target: 25% of all new course spaces are allocated to women Develop gender safeguard guidance and best practice for climate change Engage youth in all aspects including research, curriculum, etc.

23 Conduct training for education officials on climate change e.g. as a required component of teacher training 1. Cambodia National Adaptation Plan Financing Framework and Implementation Plan for MoEYS, p24 2. CCCSP2014- 2023 3. Strengthen education quality of teachers and build capacity of planning officers on teaching and learning methodologies of climate change Strengthening climate-resilient education through capacity building and institutional strengthening Baseline: No data available Target: 60% of teachers primary and secondary trained on climate change concepts. 1. Climate change mitigation 2. Pollution reduction 3. Biodiversity 4. Environment conservation 5. 5Rs.

Conditional Engage youth in all aspects including research, curriculum, etc.

24 Conduct climate risk analysis for the existing electricity infrastructures and provide recommendations National Adaptation Plan Financing Framework and Implementation Plan, p. 24 for MME Strengthen climate-resilient energy through electricity infrastructure improvement in order to respond to climate related disasters.

Baseline: 0? 1. Vulnerability assessment of existing 5 power plants 2. Vulnerability assessment of the existing 1000km of national power transmission network 1. Forest fire prevention and biodiversity protection 2. Local community safety and life protection 3. Water and air pollution 322,000 500,000 Adapting the Energy Sector to Climate Change by International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) A Framework Strategy for a Resilient Energy Union with a Forward-looking Climate Change Policy by EU Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment by X?

Increase storage capacity by adjust water release schedule to maximize generation Amplified by runoff conditions, the resulting change in water availability determines whether power output is reduced or increased 26 Strengthen institutional capacities at national and sub-national levels to integrate gender responsiveness in climate change adaptation's policies, plans, programming, including gender budgeting - Mainstreaming Gender and Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023-Neary Ratanak V, MoWA- GCCC 5 years plan, MoWA Optimize the implementation of policy, action plans, programs of gender mainstreaming in climate change adaptation at national and sub- national levels Improve gender equality, Gender responsive action, Gender responsive budgeting in policies planning of action and programmes Conditional MoWA prefers to implement this actions base on available fund (small CCCA support) 27 Enhance coordination and implementing accountability mechanisms to reduce climate change vulnerabilities of disadvantaged women and other marginalized groups such as ethnic minority women and men, People with Disability (PWD), youth, and elderly - Mainstreaming Gender and Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023 - Neary Ratanak V, MoWA - GCCC 5 years plan, MoWA Increase collaboration with Ministries, institutions, civil society, development partners and the private sector in an efficient and accountable manner Extending the scope of partnership building Increase the family economy, food and nutrition Security 28 Enhance monitoring and evaluation systems of sectoral ministries to track gender outcomes in climate change initiatives with particular focus on collecting and managing sex- disaggregated data, gender indicators and budgeting, outcome-based reporting, and dissemination and up-scaling of the gender and climate change adaptation related knowledge generated.

- Mainstreaming Gender and Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023 - Neary Ratanak V, MoWA - GCCC 5 years plan, MoWA Develop and strengthen the effectiveness of the collection and management of gender- disaggregated data, performance- based reporting, dissemination and promotion of gender-sensitive knowledge in response to climate change adaptation.

Baseline: 0 Targets: At least five key sectoral ministries have developed and implemented an M&E system to monitor gender outcomes in climate change initiatives by 2025. By 2030 at least ten sectoral ministries have developed and implemented this M&E system 200,000 Technology in the design and implementation of gender performance monitoring and evaluation systems of climate change adaptation initiatives Conditional NCSD has fund for system and training as part of Enhanced Transparency Framework Implementation 29 Capacity development for GCCC members and sectoral ministries on gender analysis, gender responsive and NDC -Mainstreaming Gender and Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023 -Neary Ratanak V, MoWA -GCCC 5 years plan, MoWA Builds effectively and optimize of capacity for members of GCCC and sectoral ministries on Gender analysis, gender responsive and NDC Capacity development Promotion of gender in social inclusiveness Reduction of gender gap in social environment 400,000 Technology is well available Target: 50% participants in capacity development are female Women participate in capacity development - NDC Roadmap and stakeholder engagement plan 2019-2030 - Mainstreaming Gender and Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023 - Neary Ratanak V, MoWA - GCCC 5 years plan, MoWA Baseline: 0 Target: A Technical guideline for Gender mainstreaming in NDC process has developed and launched in 2025 Mainstreaming gender and social inclusion in NDC Analysis of gender integration in NDC (both adaptation and mitigation) CCCSP 2014- 2023: 1. Leverage the decentralization process to strengthen financial and institutional processes for local adaptation 2. Mainstream climate change into national and sub-national development plans and the NSPS Strengthen climate-resilient communities though local business supplier of clean energy and green technology Baseline: Testing in Takeo and Pursat (4 districts) Target: 25 communes of 3 provinces namely Takeo, Kampong Thom, and Prey Veng with integration of climate change into financial management, institutional arrangement and policy reform by 2030 8,000,000 13,000,000 1. Climate change governance 2. Climate vulnerability and impact assessment for 25 target communes 3. Climate Change Index Solar for hatching and heating, solar pumping station.

CCCSP 2014- 2023:1. Leverage the decentralization process to strengthen financial and institutional processes for local adaptation2. Mainstream climate change into national and sub-national development plans and the NSPS Strengthen climate-resilient local governance through financial, institutional, policy and strategic plan reform in order to respond to current and projected climate hazards and prevent from loss and damage due to hazard Baseline: 8 districtsTargets: 90,000 Direct Beneficiaries equivalent to 3% of total population by 2026 13,185,000 14,000,000 1. Climate change governance2. Climate vulnerability and impact assessment for 20 target communes3. GCF funding modalities and investment criteria standard4. NCDD accreditation standards Target: 30% of participants in the institutional arrangements are womena. Promote gender equality by engaging more women in institutional arrangement for climate change 33 Reducing vulnerability of local communities though sub-national climate governance reform (focusing on policy) Strengthen local climate solution to respond to climate hazards through: 1. Improved awareness, capacity and skills 2. Adaptation planning is integrated in sub- national planning 3. Local adaptive infrastructure and service 1. NCDD will also implement ESS, Gender, M&E along with climate actions according to GCF standards 2. Create enabling environment for local solution to address climate change 10,000,000 10,500,000 1. Capacity building program develop for civil servants of MoI 2. GCF funding modalities and investment criteria standards 3. NCDD accreditation standards Target: 30% participation of women in the process The component of project output to be aligned with Policy on Promotion of Gender Equality for Sub- national Democratic Development of NCDD Develop policy which include PPP for relevant sectors in sub-national adaptation planning 34 Enable effective decision-making for health interventions through generation of information and improved surveillance or early- warning systems 1. Train health care providers on reporting & data surveillance 2. Strengthening clinical diagnostic (rapid usage guideline development) 3. National Action Plan for Dengue and other Arboviral Disease Prevention and Control 4. SOP for dengue surveillance system 1. Strengthen climate-resilient health program to respond to health risk posted by climate change 2. Dengue sentinels expansion 113,519 - CamEWARN - HIS - Climate change risk: vulnerability assessment - National Dengue Surveillance System Conditional Youth could engage through campaign/ awareness at least 40% are youth (15-35 age) 2023-2030 (15% of participants are private sector) Dengue stakeholder (clinic) are also from private sector. MoH have engaged clinic into actions through capacity building and awareness campaign 1. Develop rural water safety planning 2. WASH Assessment tools development for health care facilities and communities 3. Establishment of technical working group for CC on Health at Ratanakiri 1. TWG-Meeting on WASH-Health Care Facilities related to Climate Change 2. The assessment was conducted at 25 health centers in Ratanakiri 3. The assessment was conducted at communities in three districts, 15 communes, and 75 villages.

Target: 40% project beneficiaries of health services are female Reduce challenges for women and girls in access to water 50% of women report increased access to water for themselves and their families as a result of project activities Youth could engage through campaign/ awareness at least 40% are youth (15-35 age) Private sector could support by participation in training workshop or activities 36 Strengthen and provide capacity building of technical guidelines for diagnosis, detection, control, prevention and treatment of vector-borne and water-borne diseases, injuries and other food poisoning illnesses arising from climate change Clinical Diagnosis - Vector-borne: National guideline for Clinical Management of Dengue (WHOs funded, 2018 - Water-borne: +Leptospirosis, +Schistosomiasis Endorse Pending Melioidosis, Endorsed Treatment for water-borne and vector-borne diseases related to climate change are strengthened -HC, HP, RHP Capacity for health professionals improved to identify and treat climate- sensitive health issues 37 Conduct water sanitation and hygiene (WASH) assessment on climate change and develop planning for communities and health facilities.

Reduce health impact of climate change for women Gender, age, disability status and location disaggregated data are included in health databases 38 Strengthen institutional capacities to effectively integrate climate risks and adaptation options in health sector planning and implementation - TWG Meeting on Development syllabus Climate Change for Health to integrate into masters Degree of CC - Strengthening Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Management for health -Capacity of health personnel improved to identify and treat to climate-sensitive disease 107,408 - Climate change website for Department of Preventive Medicine - Emailing, Telegram, Mobile phones Youth could engage through campaign/ awareness at least 40% are youth (15-35 age) Private sector could support by funding or material support participant in training workshop Baseline: Projections show that heat stress will cause an average reduction in productivity in Cambodia, across all sectors, of 6.54% by 2055 under a worst- case climate change scenario. This NDC aims to increase the focus on adaptation to avoid loss and damages caused by heat stress, including reduced labor productivity. Around 86% of industrial workers are employed by the garment, textile, and footwear (GTF) sector. Target: The adoption of heat stress adaption actions in GTF factories could benefit up to 800,000 workers, reducing their exposure to health risks and increasing their productivity.

Under BAU, by 2050, reduced labour productivity accounts for 57% of all loss and damage from climate change. It affects all sectors but is particularly high in manufacturing and construction The private sector will play a large role in driving adaption actions, motivated by labor productivity and associated profits, but the government can provide support through raising awareness, information, advice, and policy implementation. Depending on the actions, other government entities and actors will need to be involved.

40 Enhance the quality of broadcasting means and expand the capacity of coverages for raising awareness on climate change nationwide -National AdaptationPlan FinancingFrame work 2017 - Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan (2014-2023) -Ministry of Information Strategic Plan -Increased knowledge and level of awareness among the public on climate change so they can prepare in a timely manner should any catastrophe occur. -Increased participation among public in environmental protection. - Well-informed people on climate change able to change their living attitudes and strengthen their capacity towards climate change adaptation. -Promote access to information among the public on climate change.

-GHG mitigation -Environmental protection -Forest protection -Biodiversity conservation 5,000,000 80% of population is well-informed about climate change and its adaptation. CBA analysis would be conducted Private sector would introduce the new technology, providing fund, develop broadcasting station 41 Training and enhancing human capacity on climate change in information sector -National Adaptation Plan Financing Framework 2017 -Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan (2014-2023) -Ministry of Information Strategic Plan -Increase the capacity of media officials and journalists so they are enabled to covers/report on climate change issues in an accurate and professional manner.

Baseline: 4 capacity buildings and training workshops on climate change have been conducted in Phnom Penh, Preah Sihanouk and Battambang Province. (approx.: 50 person) Targets: -Organize 20 Workshops/Seminars -Conduct 20 training -Organize 10 study exchanges -GHG Mitigation -Enhance journalistic professionalism - Reduce the spread of disinformation Face to face or Virtual (Webinar) Encourage and empower female media officials and journalists to participate in these programs. Target: 30% of training recipients are female 75% of training recipients report increased skills to report on climate change issues Journalists and private broadcasting media organization are invited to participate in these trainings The experts from line ministries specially MoE are invited to be a resource person.

42 Urge private media organizations to participate in covering/broadcasti ng the climate change topics and to complement the state broadcasting agencies.

-National Adaptation Plan Financing Framework 2017 -Ministry of Information Strategic Plan -The participation of private media organizations enabled to expand the capacity of coverages to remote and vulnerable areas. -Strengthen cooperation and experience sharing on climate change broadcasting between public and private media organizations.

Baseline: No baseline available. There were several private media organizations such as CBS, Hang Meas and Bayon collaborating with Ministry of Information so far. Target: 90% of private media organizations including Electronic, Traditional and Online media participate in climate change broadcasting campaigns.

-Reduce cost of climate risk -informed society and active citizens -GHG Mitigation Environmental protection -Forest protection -Biodiversity conservation 1250000 80% of population is well-informed about climate change and its adaptation implications Target: 30% of those interviewed report increased awareness of climate change are women Women groups living in remote and vulnerable areas are able to receive comprehensive news on climate change and actively participate in environmental protection.

News anchors/hosts who majority are youth working at media organizations play a vital role to encourage/ promote the public on Climate Change adaptation Collaboration with private media organizations. Support private media organization on technical, specialist and funding.

43 Urge and encourage to reduce (or ban) all forms of commercial advertisement that has negative impact on environment Discouraging (or banning) all forms of commercial ads that effect climate change is a direct and effective respond - Reduce cost of climate risk -GHG Mitigation Environmental protection -Forest protection -Biodiversity conservation 500000 Minimizing commercial ads of any products/goods that has negative impact on environment Target: 30% of people that report changing behaviour as a result of advertising are women Encourage women group to consume all products or goods that are do not harm the environment.

Unconditional News anchors/hosts who majority are youth working at media organizations play a vital role to encourage/ promote the public on Climate Change adaptation Urge for participation/ collaboration among media organizations in this campaign (Private agencies is a target) 44 Integrating climate change response measures onto the construction design for buildings and for rural housing (use of modern integration of technology) Strategic National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction in Cambodia 2008- 2013 Strengthen regulation and capacity for construction sector especially/includin g in the coastal zone locations to adaption to climate change.

1. Stakeholders (designer, user, and building commercial owner) are aware of the risks and potential impacts of environment posed by variability in weather patterns and observed and projected climate changes on the different types of building construction2. Environmental Risk Management and Mitigation is created because the construction equipment operations consume a lot of natural resources, such as electricity and/or diesel fuel. 3. The measure includes enacting strict laws to enforce institutions to make environmental impact assessment (EIA) in the early stage of projects, and enhancing the awareness of construction participants with regard to impacts of construction in the environmentThe results also revealed that "search about alternative methods for construction to mitigate the adverse impacts of construction on the environment" was ranked in the second position with regard to proposed solutions to mitigate the environmental impacts of construction.

3,400,000 Benefits: according to the CPEIR, climate related investment for construction sector is about $300,000 per year.

Restoration can be a crucial opportunity for women economic empowermentTarget: 20% of poor women headed household access to climate change resilient housing20% of all beneficiaries involved in construction design are women Provide inputs in construction design as they are the main input providers for MLMUPC 45 Develop resilient infrastructure of school buildings in response to climate change Strengthen climate-resilient education through infrastructure development in order to respond to climate related disasters such as temperature increase, drought, flood, storms and lightning.

Baseline: 5 Target: 18 school buildings can be targeted according to the planned budget and the implementing period is to build 5 schools in 2020 to 18 schools in 2030.

1,950,000 2,000,000 Following last updated Standard Design of MoEYS and Climate Change to implement as pilot project including the components as below: 01 tiling roof school building with 05 classrooms, equipped with furniture for students and teachers, electricity power connection, indoor ventilation, lightning protection equipment, latrine and sanitation room, water well and water tank, planting tree and garden etc...

Increase enrollment rate of girls with more schools closed to home. Target: 47% of all new school enrollments are girls 46 Implement climate change and disaster resilient construction and infrastructure standards including for public sector and community-focused buildings covering public health, education, WASH etc.

- 2015 Law on Disaster Management (Article 10, 11) - Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023 (Strategic Objective 4) - National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction 2019-2023 (Priority 11) - Increased infrastructure resilience to withstand impacts of disasters - Interlinked with energy-efficiency policies for Climate Change Adaptation Baseline: Standard is in draft now, and further development and implementation are needed - 100% of new building compliant with climate and disaster resilient construction guidelines - Conditional: 20% of older buildings retrofitted - Established guidelines for incorporating climate and disaster risk assessments into design and construction of new buildings and critical infrastructures (school, health facility and other facilities). - Established or improved national legislative frameworks for resilient construction and its implementation mechanism.

- Technical guidelines cross- beneficial to other sectors - Potential for community groups (e.g. school support committees) to be involved in construction/retrofit ting - Increased energy- efficiency, and use of climate-aware products 400,000 (needs to be enhanced to account for reconstructi on of older buildings) The standard will benefit to social and economy (28,000K) 1$ investment produce 70$ benefit Private sector would engage in process by learning from standard and apply these gained knowledge to their project 47 (DLUP) Prepare spatial planning (city/district/munici pality) guidelines at all levels for climate change adaptation (CLUP) Integrating climate change response measures to the commune land use planning National Policy and Strategic Plan for Green Growth 2013-2030 National Urban Development Strategy Strengthen legal framework and national and sub- national capacity for resilient urban growth 586,000 Of which: 326,000 16,300 per CLUP/DLUP implementa tion of adaption designing activities in 350 communes and 20 Districts (unconditio nal) 260,000 US$13,000 per District (conditional ) Land Survey High Technology Aero Photo for mapping Soil Test for spatial planning Private sector: contract consultants to provide technical aspect on planning and full engagement for implementation 48 Integrating climate change response measures to the policy of social land concession (SLC) and its procedures NAP Financing Framework and Implementation Plan: Sector #34, Sector#35, and Sector#16 (1) Builds capacity to effectively respond to food insecurity and reduces the risks related to disasters such as floods and droughts in social land concession areas. (2) Climate- proof Low-cost shelter construction for land recipients.

Conditional Youth will be targeted in the consultation process of the SLC to endure they are well informed, and their needs are address in the planning and implementation of the SLC Private sector will be engaged at the implementation stage to market activities (for instance, to buy agriculture products from the communities) 49 Prepare modality of standardized green spaces for urban planning or new sub- cities to address vulnerability of urbanization.

Baseline: 0 By 2023: Green Building Development toolkit is formulated. Green physical space is standardized for commercial purpose and other small city use By 2030: At least 50% of small city development request are permitted with fully use of all elements in toolkit By 2030: All small enlarged city is standardized with full physical and climate resilient norms addressed in tool toolkit.

Mitigation co- benefit: contribution to the local GHG emission Environment co- benefit: ecosystem restoration (i.e. regulate water) Social co-benefit: job creation, improved public health 7860000 Target: 30% of consulted community members are women Restoration can be a crucial opportunity for womens economic empowerment.

Conditional Needs of youths will be reflected in the urban or sub- city planning process Private companies such as construction companies, gated communities, architect companies, engineers, etc. will be engaged to ensure climate change issues are reflected in their practices 50 Vulnerability Assessment towards the development of climate change strategic plans to respond to the impacts on land, housings, coastal management, and building due to climate change Improve knowledge on urban vulnerabilities to climate risks for cities in urban and rural areas Strengthen early warning systems for urban and rural slumps Baseline: 0 By 2030, 60% of cities in urban and cities assessed on its vulnerabilities (conditional) By 2050, 100% of cities in urban and cities assessed on its vulnerabilities (unconditional) Contribution to climate data related to cities through finding of the assessments 2560000 Target: 30% of vulnerability assessment (data enumerators and analysis staff) are women # of assessment that include gender and age disaggregated data Restoration can be a crucial opportunity for womens economic empowerment.

Conditional Youth issues will be included at the assessment design and analysis stages Climate change impacts on private sector investment and private sector roles in reducing vulnerabilities will be part of the assessment 51 Promote land use planning tools for urban houses and building construction adaptive to climate change benefits to the low-income and homeless people NAP Financing Framework and Implementation Plan: Sector #34, Sector#35, and Sector#16 Improve adaptive capacity of low - income households and vulnerable households through provision of climate-proofed shelters Baseline: 0 By 2023: Complete zoning and all toolkits, and guidelines By: 2008: Complete 50% of Urban Buildings And 50% of rural housing By 2030: Complete 100% of Urban Buildings and 100% of rural housings The project will produce low-carbon emissions to enhance environmental atmosphere Social co-benefit: build assets (housing) for low income and homeless people 2560000 Climate-resilient building construction technology and Low- cost affordable housing technology Conditional The tools will be disseminated to construction sector to encourage them engage them in climate resilient projects 52 Promote proper low- cost shelters for low income households resilient to climate change, practically in the area of social land concession NSDP 2019-2023 and NAP Financing Framework and Implementation Plan: Review of Priority Action, and Construction Law 2019 Baseline: 0 By 2023: Complete zoning and all toolkits, and guidelines By: 2008: Complete 50% of rural housing By 2030: Complete 100% of rural shelters in social land concession The project will produce low-carbon emission that is to enhance environmental atmosphere Social co-benefit: reduce land conflict, improve livelihood of beneficiaries through provision of low-cost shelters in the areas of social land concession Conditional The tools will be disseminated to construction sector to encourage them engage them in climate resilient projects 53 Development of building code with mainstreaming climate change into building designs Improve regulations and national capacity on building code to adapt to climate change Baseline: 0 By 2024: Toolkit finalized, and launching By 2026: 50% of building permits are mainstreamed, By 2030: 100% of building permits are fully mainstreamed By 2026: 1000 engineering professionals trained, and by 2030: 2000 professionals are trained Energy consumption in building sectors Reduction of GHG in atmosphere Promote low-cost materials for building and housing Improve health and safety of city inhabitants 6560000 Restoration can be a crucial opportunity for womens economic empowerment. Target: 30% of trained professionals and engineers are women Conditional Youth issues and roles will be integrated in the development process of the building code 54 Mainstream climate change response measures into coastal development planning against sea water intrusion, sea water rise and seasonal storm destruction, and rising temperature National Policy and Strategic Plan for Green Growth 2013-2030 National Urban Development Strategy Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan Baseline: 0 By 2024: Complete all associate tools and planning scenarios for building, housing, and coastal protection By 2030: 100 km sea wall completion (conditional) Promote sea engineering environment, sea water rise, sea tidal hazard, seawater intrusion and sea erosion Disaster management to protect coastal populations Operation Cost and TA cost: (1) 4,500,000 (2) Sea Wall: 98,000,000 Total: 102,500,00 0 Restoration can be a crucial opportunity for womens economic empowerment. Target: 30% of all construction jobs go to women 30% of all training and awareness raising participants are women Strengthening sub- national capacities and processes for localizing and delivering on SDGs and building resilience at the city level, the initiative will seek to address unstainable pattern of urban growth. Climate exacerbated impact is also adding challenges to sustainable growth, the initiative will also consider integrate climate planning in city planning and investment projects. It will tackle the barriers on: 1. knowledge and capacity; 2. access to finance, and 3. partnership engagement.

Strengthen knowledge and capacity on resilient city.Financing for resilient cities.Partnership and communication.

10,000,000 15,000,000 1. Climate change governance2. Climate vulnerability and impact assessment 3. National Green Growth Policy The component of project output to be aligned with Policy on Promotion of Gender Equality for Sub- national Democratic Development of NCDD 56 Develop national road construction and maintenance design standards for national and provincial roads, considering climate change impact including M&E framework develop for climate proofing and low-carbon technology roads Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023 NSDP 2019-2023 Rectangular Strategy National Policy on Green Growth 2013-2030 Sectoral Development Plans The future national transport infrastructure is climate proofed, especially in sensitive/vulnerab le area where new standards have been used in design phase of construction projects.

Reduce road repair/ rehabilitation cost Reduce vehicle maintenance Save time Ensure flow of traffic and transportation 500,000 (Experts, data collection and analysis, review and risk assessment of climate change impact, ) 600,000 USD. -Climate proofed standard design is built, quality of road infrastructure resilience to extreme climate event reduce maintenance and rehabilitation cost, good condition of road will result in better combustion led to GHG reduction 57 Repair and rehabilitate existing road infrastructure and ensure effective operation and maintenance systems, considering climate change impact Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023, National Adaptation Plan Financing Framework 2017 Strengthen climate road resilience to avoid loss and damage due to climate hazards and ensure full and sustain road operations for road users particularly most vulnerable group Baseline: 0 New national road construction using climate proofing road standards by 2030. Repair road using climate proofing standards by 2030.

- Contribute to GHG reduction - Food Security, Agriculture market connectivity, Skill development, Improve productivities - Better rural connectivity will promote a better rural economic, and environmental activities The current technology is available for resilient road construction; however, more advanced tech is still needed for construction in a challenging Environment.

Target: 30% of those who receive skills training are women 50% of those benefiting from social and economic facilities are women Men and women have access to social and economic facilities.

59 News coverage and program production for awareness raising on climate change and its impacts -National Adaptation Plan Financing Framework (2017) Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan (2014-2023) -Ministry of Information Strategic Plan -Producing diversified and pluralistic contents enable to attract the attention of different types of audiences on climate change through educational spot, featuring news, roundtable discussion and entertainments.

-Reduce cost of climate risk -GHG Mitigation Environmental protection -Forest protection -Biodiversity conservation 3000000 - Hundreds of educational materials being produced and documented - Different types of audience being informed on climate change Women is among the targeted audience in which they feel the sense of inclusivity. Target: 30% of roundtable participants are women Conditional Youth is one of the targeted group in which the contents to be produced for.

60 Develop and annually update national and subnational multi- hazard and climate risk assessments, including identification of most vulnerable communities.

- 2015 Law on Disaster Management (Article 16)- National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction 2019-2023 (Priority 3, 4)- Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023 (Strategic Objective 5) 30% of presentation participants femaleGender and age disaggregated data is collected and made available as per the guidance of SFDRR.At least 20% of women in technical positions and decision making roles at national and subnational levels.Gender and disaster vulnerability atlas could be developed.

NCDM will engage the private sector in process. They could support NCDM for funding, material or cooperation 61 National end-to-end early warning systems with focus on effective dissemination to populations at risk - 2015 Law on Disaster Management (Article 11) - National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction 2019-2023 (Priority 16) - Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023 (Strategic Objective 2, 5) - Availability of real-time climate data for informed climate information - Enables community-level preparedness and response to disasters Other sectors, i.e. water resources and meteorology, agriculture will be of benefited by potential cross- sectoral mitigation activities.

Females to make up 40% of subscriptions to EWS1294 system Gender-sensitive EWS to be implemented, including inclusion of disability and other most vulnerable group. Specific EWS medium is to be implemented for various types of disability.

Private sector would take some roles (subject to discuss more) for example introduction new technology/knowledg e (mobile company provide the data) - 2015 Law on Disaster Management (Article 10) - Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023 (Strategic Objective 3) - National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction 2019-2023 (Priority 9) Strengthened community preparedness and adaptation capacities.

Baseline: 2 (at Kompot and Kep provinces) Target: 75% of communities have preparedness and contingency plans developed and updated bi-annually, including disaster simulation and climate change adaptation strategies - Social resilience at community level and increased engagement in disaster preparedness and response - Reduced asset, infrastructure, and life loss due to disasters Females represent 25% of VDMG and CCDM Training of trainers of Women Champion in DRR and CCA  ensuring more representative of women on disaster and climate risk management. 25% increase of women in climate change community based decision making positions Private sector would engage in process by learning from standard and apply these gained knowledge to their project 63 Building resilience of biodiversity conservation and restoration to adapt to climate change Baseline: 0 15 PAs with species- specific conservation action plans 15 PAs with forest restoration plans under implementation Total budget: 1,250,000+3,750,000= Environment 1,125,000 To improve the knowledge base, support conservation action, and strengthen the enabling environment for addressing threats to species and ecosystem Number of PAs with species- specific conservation action plans 25% of eco-tourism inputs/initiatives are directed to women Women make up 50% of representatives in biodiversity conservation inanities (decision making, training, capacity building, services etc.) Building adaptive capacity of rural family to be smart in agricultural productivities and other livelihood promotion in changing environment.

Baseline: 10 villages in Takeo, 10 in Kampong Speu and 10 Thbaung Kmom Targets: - -Job creation -Food security -Behavior Change -Better living environment -Wellbeing and environmental friendliness of communities to improve Target: 30% of total beneficiaries are female Gender-responsiveness towards more participation in decision making and benefits. Women will be empowered in communities and households.

Incorporate youth as community volunteers.

65 Strengthen flood resiliency capacity of communities around Tonle Sap (access to clean water, off grid renewable energy, and waste management) CCCSP 2014- 2023: a) Leverage the decentralization process to strengthen financial and institutional processes for local adaptation b) Mainstream climate change into national and sub-national development plans and the NSPS Strengthen climate-resilient local governance through financial, institutional, policy and strategic plan reform in order to respond to current and projected climate hazards and prevent from loss and damage due to hazard Baseline: 0 Targets: 10 communes of 4 provinces namely Battambang, Pursat, Kampong Chhaning, and Siem Reap Province with integration of climate change into financial management, institutional arrangement and policy reform by 2028 10,000,000 20,000,000 1. Climate change governance 2. Climate vulnerability and impact assessment for 10 target communes Climate vulnerable map 66 Building climate resilient livelihood and public infrastructures in social land concession for vulnerable communities The Climate resilience at local level, within the social land concession communities will be strengthened and adapted through integrated into the support community infrastructures and sustainable management response to flood, drouth, strong wind. In addition, the GHG also effectively reduces from the introduce of sustainable land management practices by adopt to resilience agriculture activities and forest resources management that will positively create alternatives livelihood for the potential vulnerable communities. Help to build ownership and decision- making process at the community level as resulted from the project, the community will be able to engage in local planning and implementation with regards action to adapt with future trends of climate change.

Modality: the project designed as potential for scaling up through its key success of implementation. It would be the key recommendation for the improvement of social land concession implementation to include climate change as one of main focus while community will really need support to cope with such climate change issues when settle-in new development area of social land concession sites. Improve knowledge: the project will help to improve understanding for sub-national level, local authorities on climate change both of adaptation and mitigation though join implementation follow decentralize approach under coordination of National Committee for Sub-National Democratic Development Secretariat (NCDDS). Similarly, the community groups will also receive training and awareness raising to build their sense understanding climate change to engage fully participation for the project implementation. This will positively contribute to both of adaption and mitigation action in the future.

14,500,000 18,000,000 1- Development of Information and Communication Technology (NSDP 2014-2023)2- Climate change governance3- Climate Change Index4- Social Land Concession sub-degree 5- National REED+ strategy 2017- 2026 67 Building climate resilience for district and commune governance through policy and strategic development plan reform (focus on implementation) CCCSP 2014- 2023: a) Leverage the decentralization process to strengthen financial and institutional processes for local adaptation b) Mainstream climate change into national and sub-national development plans and the NSPS Strengthen climate-resilient local governance through financial, institutional, policy and strategic plan reform in order to respond to current and projected climate hazards and prevent loss and damage due to hazards Baseline: 0 50 communes of 9 provinces namely Takeo, Battambang, Peahvihear, Krati, Steng treng, Kampong Chhaning, Prey Veng, Svayreng, and Kampot with integration of climate change into financial management, institutional arrangement and policy reform by 2027 10,000,000 15,000,000 1 - Climate change governance 2 - Climate vulnerability and impact assessment for 50 target communes 3 - Climate Change Index Conditional Engage youth in analysis on impact of climate change and integrate cc into development 68 Mainstreaming climate change into Education Strategic Plan 2019-2023 Strategic Plan and SDG4 Roadmap for Education 2030 1. SDG4 Roadmap for education 2030 2. ESP 2019-2023 3. CCCSP2014- 2023: Capitalize on lessons learned, local knowledge and good practices for development of policies and actions for adaptation and mitigation.

Strengthen resilience through education policy, research and planning reform in order to respond to climate related hazards. Baseline: Integrated in ESP 2019-2023 primary and secondary sub-sector (Only strategies) Target: climate change concepts are mainstreamed into ESP and SDG4 Roadmap for education 2030 a) Climate change adaptation b) Policy, Planning & Guidelines, c) Strengthening d) Research enhancement 800,000 900,000 1 - SDG4 Roadmap for education 2030 2 - ESP 2019-2023 3 - Strategies and interventions in the ESP and SDG4 69 Strengthen the cooperation with local and International development agencies, NGOs and relevant institutions for technical and financial support to implement the adaptation planning in media sector Strengthen the cooperation with local and international development agencies, NGOs and relevant institutions is the best approach to accelerate the strategic plan implementation and ensuring the sustainability of projects.

-GHG Mitigation Environmental protection -Forest protection -Biodiversity conservation 100000 Strengthen bond of cooperation between Ministry of Information and stakeholders. The latest cooperation. Moinfo implemented a project on Climate Change knowledge and Capacity building through TV/ Radio and Media, supported by NCSD / CCCA (2017-2019) Target: 30% are female Conditional Collaboration with private media organizations 70 Development of climate change national/capital/ provincial development plans including an M&E system with specific indicators Climate change adaptation and mitigation and other environmental issues (air pollution, water pollution, waste management, biodiversity, etc.) will be integrated into a single plan.

5,000,000 Cost of trainings, consultation s, and follow-up activities -Sub- national planning capacity building under budget of government .

National M&E Manual/Guideline/Handbook - M&E Capacity Building Plan - Training on M&E incl. data collection methods as well as data interpretation and presentation - Annual Progress Report/Voluntary National Review of the implementation of NSDP/CSDGs" Climate change mainstreaming is conditional (Both financial and technical capacity for ToT) 71 Development of a climate change public investment program for the national/capital/ provincial levels Building climate resilience investment planning through the formulation and compilation of information of climate investment fund to assist in making decision for climate change actions and priority.

Baselines: 0The National/ Capital/ Provincial three-year rolling Public Investment Program, including the Climate Change-related Projects will be developed every year.Online climate investment and funding information will be available to public by 2030 which include the trend of climate expenditure and potential funding information which will be updated every year.

Mitigation investment planPublic awareness on climate investment and fund will be improved Climate-Informed Decisions: The National/ Capital/ Provincial Public Investment Program including the Climate Change- related Projects as a Mechanism for Lowering Carbon Emissions (Private and financial sector)PIP online. Ministries to record all investment plans including climate change in investment. (no training yet and information to be available online for climate investment 72 Building adaptive and resilient capacity for MRD officers at national and sub-national level for mainstreaming climate change into rural development planning processes and technical design.

-Strengthen capacity for Climate Change in rural development planning & technical design.

Baseline: Number of trainings have been conducted by MRD and others but there is no proper system to record Target: By 2030, about 30% of Technical Officials in MRD and PDRD have been trained - Contribute to the improvement of rural development work in challenging environment Knowledgeable VDC will help their community better in term of development and challenging environment - Lesson learnt and best practice from other countries can be applied.

Target: 30% of MRD female staffs will receive capacity building 75% of capacity building recipients report increased knowledge and application of gender integration in their work Gender is considering in all stages of project or programme to promote gender mainstreaming. Gender participation indicator will be included.

73 Build adaptive capacity on climate change for village leaders (Village Development Committees, VDCs) Strengthen capacity on climate resilience.

- Contribute to rural community development planning and practices in challenging environment 10,000,000 Lessons learnt and best practice from other countries can be applied.

Target: 40% of VDC members in committee are female Gender is considering in all stages of project or programme to promote gender mainstreaming. Gender participation indicator will be included.

Infrastructure: road, water, Policies and planning Agriculture Ecosystem-based services The vulnerability in the provinces around Tonle sap lake and Svay Rieng reduced (90 communes) -Baseline: 2019 vulnerability index 10,000,000 20,000,000 30-60% of beneficiaries Conditional Plays an important role in capacity building activities, implementation of the pilot projects and as beneficiaries 75 Update and implement the Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan (CCCSP) for 2024-2033 The CCCSP for 2024- 2033 developed and the implementation successfully conducted until 2030.

76 Integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and sectoral strategies and plans Enhanced transparency framework set in place and the sectoral M&E strengthened through capacity building 77 Enhance institutional capacity on climate change (mitigation, adaptation, policy, strategies, planning, and finance) through awareness raising, training, and advocacy Enhanced capacity of/ and coordination regarding climate change related issues with line ministries and institutions both at the national and sub-national levels. Baseline: KAP3: 2020 78 Provide capacity building and supports for Climate Change Innovation at the provincial along Tonle Sap River -Royal Government of Cambodia labels tourism sector as Green Gold. -Tourism is a non-smoke industry, which import in places. Ministry of Tourism (MOT) has developed its Climate Change Action Plan for Tourism Sector 2019-2023 -Promoting livelihood resilience through CBT/CBE tourism development. -Improving tourism standards to improve the quality of services and products. -Innovating new products design and efficiency natural resources management Encouraging all involvement tourism stakeholders for better the understanding and to engage their contribution on adaptation to two beneficiaries: 1) Environmental Education Development on green tourism. 2) Peam Krosoap was estimated be upgrade and innovated for climate change adaptation. Cambodia CBET/CET standard. 3) The quality of ecotourism services and products would improve through by tourism innovation. 4) Reducing poverty and contribute to responding effectively to climate change, so it is increasing the gross domestic product of Cambodia (GDP).

Public toilet, education signboard, billboard, rubbish bin etc. The M&E system will be aligned with National Monitoring and Evaluation Framework for Climate Change.

Target: 70% of training participants are female Encouraging women, elderly, children, poorest to involve, they might understand and support new mindset that would provide (for adaptation projects).

Cambodia Authority of Travel Agencies (CATA) where consist of dozens agencies- mostly are private sector would provide technical support, strategy development and cooperation -Royal Government of Cambodia labels tourism sector as Green Gold. -Tourism is a non-smoke industry, which import in places. Ministry of Tourism (MOT) has developed its Climate Change Action Plan for Tourism Sector 2019-2023 -Promoting livelihood resilience through CBT/CBE tourism development. -Improving tourism standards to improve the quality of services and products. -Innovating new products design and efficiency natural resources management Target: 60% of women (including children) respond to having an increased awareness of community based tourism and the impacts of climate change on this sector Youth plays an important role in all activities of MoT such as camping, cycling campaign.

-Royal Government of Cambodia labels tourism sector as Green Gold. - Tourism is a non- smoke industry, which import in places.Ministry of Tourism (MOT) has developed its Climate Change Action Plan for Tourism Sector 2019-2023 -Promoting livelihood resilience through CBT/CBE tourism development.- Improving tourism standards to improve the quality of services and products.- Innovating new products design and efficiency natural resources management MoT will work closely to expert ministries to enhance the climate resilience farming at local community. This activity is attractive much to tourist. one village one product strategy Baseline: 6 locations Target: 30 locations/provinces Target: 40% of training participants are women (including children)40% of beneficiaries for new ecotourism product development are women Youth Engagement: Promotion on quality of organic foods/vegetable to extend using and support on local products.

Support to the local agriculture product, enhance Agric- ecotourism in community by bring tourists to visit and involve agriculture active and create wonderful memories and fun. Pushing on Smart-agriculture plantation and extend on the more create of cycle systems including; fish, meat, vegetable, so on.

81 Establish an automated nation- wide hydromet monitoring network and data transmission program, including collection of climate and hydrological data Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014 - 2023 (Strategic Objective 1) National Water Resources Management and Sustainable Irrigation Road Map and Investment Program 2019  2033 47,900,000 The benefit of this activity is contributed to other adaption activities (e.g. #2, #3 and #4) Automatic Weather and Hydrological Stations configuration in Cambodia Real time hydro-meteorological platform incorporating data from MoWRAMs hydro and meteo station World Meteorological Organization (WMO) guidelines on Integrated Urban, Hydrometeorological, Climate and Environmental Guidelines.

Target: 5-10% females to be involved in network and monitoring plan development.

Conditional 20 students sent abroad for higher education (Master) (Unconditional) Consulting firm installed system and technical training to operate the system (service provider) 82 Establish a centralized and standardized approach to climate- resilient water management Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014 - 2023 (Strategic Objective 1) National Water Resources Management and Sustainable Irrigation Road Map and Investment Program 2019  2033 Increased environmental resilience More equitable water distribution/acces s to vulnerable groups Sustainable development and framework for disaster risk reduction, and can therefore act as a mechanism of coherence among these global frameworks Improved relationships between all major water users Improved water allocation and abstraction limits -> reverse/halt overdevelopment impacts Protection of environmental flows as the support of basin human needs and ecosystem Target: 10-20% female 40% of education project beneficiaries are women Gender and age disaggregated data is collected and used at the water resource management info center 83 Establish a national climate and food warning system, including a service center and flood emergency response plans Communities (including vulnerable ones) more resilient to disasters Increased risk knowledge More accurately monitoring and predicting risk Dissemination of information to public Responsive to warnings and disasters Baselines: 0 By 2030: 1 National Centre Established with Decision Supporting System 100% of provinces have Flood Emergency Response Plans Other sectors, i.e. agriculture will benefit by potential cross-sectoral mitigation activities Flood risk reduction and mitigation 8,800,000 Benefits: can be estimated from the damage and recovery cost by flood and drought the same as #2 NAP-2017: Climate risk management and rehabilitation of small, medium, and large-scale irrigation infrastructure CCCSP 2014- 2023: Introduce technologies in water work development and rehabilitation in response to the negative impacts of climate change Strengthen resilience of most vulnerable groups to respond to water shortage issues through sustainable management of ground water 1. Sustainable water management 2. Reduce water pollution 3. NCDD will also implement ESS, Gender, M&E along with climate actions according to GCF standards 10,000,000 15,000,000 1. Groundwater Analysis, Vulnerability and Risk Assessment 2. Groundwater monitoring system 3. Capacity building and advocacy program for ground water Youth engagement on groundwater conservation campaign and involvement on water conservation advocacy.

Private sector engagement on groundwater management through exchange of technology adoption.

Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014 - 2023 (Strategic Objective 1)National Water Resources Management and Sustainable Irrigation Road Map and Investment Program 2019  2033Strategic Framework for irrigation sector Improved drought resilienceClimate resilience irrigation systems and sustainable agriculture production 25% of participants for regional exchange are female40% of Farmer Water User Committees female FWUC provide capacity building on technology+NGOsSoil assessment (consulting firm)Standard for irrigation: participation in design standardcutting edge technology and advance irrigation practice: construction -Cambodia Sustainable Development Goals -Rectangular strategy -NSDP -MRD Strategic Plan WASH infrastructure in the rural area resilient and adapted to CC.

Changing attitude and practices of rural people to be more environmentally friendly The current technology is available for resilient and adaptive water supply and sanitation Target: 50% of project beneficiaries are women 50% of stakeholders in consultations are women 50% of training participants on new technologies and adaptive water systems are women Gender will be engaged in planning and using and maintaining water supply infrastructure .

Incorporate youth as community volunteers, Water user group for maintenance of the equipment  Davies, G.I., McIver, L., Kim, Y., Hashizume, M., Iddings, S. and Chan, V., (2015). Water- implications of climate change, International journal of environmental research and Plan. General Secretariat of National Council for Sustainable Development/Ministry of Environment, Kingdom of Cambodia, Phnom Penh.

Development/Ministry of Environment, Kingdom of Cambodia, Phnom Penh.

NCSD (2016). Promoting private sector contribution to the climate change response in Kingdom of Cambodia, Phnom Penh.

National Council for Sustainable Development/Ministry of Environment, Kingdom of Cambodia, Phnom Penh.

NCSD (2020). Cambodias First Biennial Update Report (BUR), National Council for Penh.

No Mitigation Projects/Activities Lead Ministry ER (ktCO2e)28 1 Promote sustainable energy practices in manufacturing Garments: 2,291 GgCO2e, 55% by 2030 Bricks: 1,799 GgCO2e, 44% by 2030 Food and Beverage: 1,043 GgCO2e, 25% by 2030 2 Urban Planning Tools for Climate Change Mitigation and the urban planning solution in three sub cities 3 Application of electrical equipments labelling & MEPS (Lighting, Cooling & Equipment) Reduce 1.2 TWh (29.7%) of electricity use in 2030 4 Improvement of process performance of EE by establishment of energy management in buildings/industries Voluntary scheme for other companies, especially for SMEs to reduce 10% in 2030 5 Public awareness campaigns, DTEBP-EE info centres Reduce 2% of energy consumption in 2030 6 Building codes and enforcement/certification for new buildings and those undergoing major renovation Reduce 10% of electricity consumption in 2030 7 Introduction of efficient electrical motors and boilers Reduce 2.3% of current electricity consumption in 2030 8 Improve sustainability of charcoal production through enforcement of regulations 9 Roadmap study on Integration of RE (Renewable Energy) resources. 25 % of renewable energy in the energy mix (solar, wind, hydro, biomass) by 2030 10 New sanitary landfills with LFG extraction and LFG extraction at the Dangkor Landfill Increase the share of waste disposed at sanitary landfills with LFG extraction from 0% in 2020 to 50% by 2030 and extract LFG from the Dangkor Landfill 11 Composting of biodegradable organic fraction of MSW supplemented with separation of organic waste (at source). If 10% of all MSW generated is composted by 2030 then up to 500 ktCO2e/year of GHG emissions can be avoided by 2030 29 N/a: sectoral projections were used.

No Mitigation Projects/Activities Lead Ministry ER (ktCO2e)28 12 Production of Refuse-Derived Fuel (RDF) from either a) fresh MSW or b) old MSW mined from the Dangkor landfill. GHG ER from RDF + anaerobic digestion up to 200 ktCO2e/year 13 Implementation of National 3R strategy MoE 421 14 Enhance maintenance and inspection of vehicle (Piloting maintenance and emission inspections of vehicles) 30 vehicle inspection centres in operation by 2030 16 Reducing GHG emission though off grid street lightening of rural municipality 10 Sangkat of Senmonorom municipality, Kep municipality, and Preah municipality integration of climate change into financial management, institutional arrangement and policy reform by 2028.

17 Bio-digesters construction (85% reduction compared to 2000) (Small size (2-3-4m3) 18 Bio-digesters construction (85% reduction compared to 2000) Medium size(6-8-10m3) 19 Bio-digesters construction (85% reduction compared to 2000) Large size(>10m3) 20 Centralized recycling facility for industrial waste from the garment sector Reduce 108,472 tCO2e/at an average of 10,847 tCO2e/year 22 Toward Battambang city to green city 5 Sangkat of Battembang municipality integration of green city by 2025 23 Shift long distance freight movement from trucks to train MPWT N/a 24 Emission management from factories Monitor air quality at 105 factories annually and provide permit letter on air emission to 90 factories. 90% of factories to be licensed.

25 Increasing the effectiveness and sustainability of agricultural land management techniques (Conservation Agriculture) 26 Organic input agriculture and bio-slurry; and deep placement fertilizer technology 30 N/a: sectoral projections were used. 31 N/a: sectoral projections were used.

No Mitigation Projects/Activities Lead Ministry ER (ktCO2e)28 10 Provinces by 2030 27 Promote manure Management through compost making process to reduce carbon emission 25 provinces and cities by 2030 30 Implementation of National Cooling Action Plan MLMUCP 1090 31 Inclusion of performance requirements of Passive 32 Implementation of passive cooling measures in the cities (addressing urban heat island effect [UHIE]), public buildings and commercial buildings.

1 FOLU NDC Scenario 1: 60% forest cover by 2030 MAFF, Rectangular Strategy IV, INDC In all sectors except FOLU, there is only one NDC scenario. The FOLU sector has three NDC scenarios, as follows:

FOLU NDC Scenario 1: 60% forest cover by 2030  (MAFF, Rectangular Strategy IV). Increment of forest cover up to 60% of national land area was suggested by the MAFF.

According to the received information, this target is agreed with the Rectangular Strategy IV, angle 2 (60% of forest cover is maintained).

This scenario was based on the FOLU sector target presented in the countrys INDC report. The INDC target was also developed in the expectation of maintaining 60% forest cover of the total land area. However, the considered base year was 2010. The effort necessary to increase the forest cover was less (from 57% forest cover in 2010 increasing 1 hectare of forest cover was estimated as 4.7 tCO2e/ha/year in INDC.

The following three overall NDC scenarios were developed based on the three NDC scenarios of the FOLU sector:

Estimated emission reductions under the different NDC scenarios are shown in Figure 15 below.

As per Figure 15, the estimated emission reduction with FOLU by 2030 under different NDC scenarios will be approximately:

NDC scenario 1: 329.2 million tCO2e/year (212.4 % reduction, of which 92% is from  NDC scenario 2: 64.6 million tCO2e/year (41.7% reduction, of which 59.1% is from  NDC scenario 3: 30.2 million tCO2e/year (19.7 % reduction, of which 12.5% is from FOLU).

The share of distribution of the planned emission reduction under the NDC scenario 1 among the sectors is indicated in Figure 16 below.

Overall GHG emission reductions for different NDC scenarios (including the FOLU) Table 18: Sectoral share and absolute number of GHG emissions reduction under the NDC The NDC Scenario 1 has a mitigation target of 329.2 million tCO2e/year by the year 2030.

This is a 212.4 % reduction compared to the BAU scenario.

The FOLU is to provide the major share of 92% emission reduction by 2030. Other sectors like energy (4.2 %), agriculture (1.9%), industry (IPPU) (1.8 %), and waste (0.2 %) are also expected to contribute in a minor way.

The FOLU sector would contribute to 49.2% of the total GHG emissions of the country by 2030 and 61% by 2016.

However, this is a high national ambition. A main reason for the reduction of forest area is utilizing forest land for agriculture. Therefore, supporting policies such as increasing the yield of agricultural lands and possible interventions like forest gardens where a combination of large and small useful trees are planted in home gardens need to be explored in order to achieve this target without hindering the production of the agriculture sector.

The share of distribution of the planned emission reductions under the NDC scenario 2 among different sectors is indicated in Figure 17 below.

Table 19 Sectoral share and absolute number of GHG emissions reduction under the NDC Under the NDC scenario 2, an emission reduction of 64.6 million tCO2e/year is expected by 2030. This is a 41.7 % reduction compared with the BAU case.

Even under this scenario, the FOLU is expected to provide the major share of the 59.1% reduction in emissions by 2030. Other sectors like energy (21.3%), agriculture (9.6%), Industry (IPPU) (9.1%), and waste (0.9%) are also expected to contribute in a significant way.

This approach will have an even wider participation than scenario 1 and will have even better resilience to failures in the mitigation activities. Yet one disadvantage of the involvement of many sectors could be the need for more experts in many fields. However, this could be considered as an opportunity to develop or strengthen Cambodias capacity.

The share of distribution of the planned emission reduction under the NDC scenario 3 among the various sectors is indicated in Figure 18 below.

Table 20 Sectoral share and absolute number of GHG emission reduction under the NDC Under the NDC scenario 3, the target emission reduction is 30.2 million tCO2e/year by 2030, which is a 19.7 % reduction compared with the BAU scenario.

The main emphasis for emission reduction under this scenario is on the Energy sector (45.5%), followed by the Agriculture sector (20.6%). The Industry (IPPU) sector is at third place with a 19.5% expected contribution. The FOLU will also join with above sectors to make a more than 95% contribution in the emission reduction.

Placing less emphasis on the FOLU could be more socially acceptable as the rapid de- forestation of the country would have been linked to the expansion of agriculture. Expecting a 20.6% share of emission reduction from agriculture also may be more acceptable to rural farming communities. However, there could be an effect on soil, water and other natural resources not considered in the GHG mitigation study.

Mitigating emissions from the electricity sector will be directed mainly on renewable energy power generation. There will be barriers imposed by the availability and the absorption capacity of the grid which would have to be addressed for the achievement of the targets. Mitigating transport sector emissions would require policy instruments and carbon pricing instruments to promote low emission transport modes. Social acceptance would depend on the chosen approaches, public awareness and the instruments used.

The RGC can decide on an NDC scenario to be followed based on the adaptability under the environmental, cultural, economic, technical and political conditions and priorities of the country.

The DCC of the GSSD, supported by CCCA, have been coordinating stakeholder engagement and collecting submissions from line ministries on priorities for the NDC revision for both mitigation and adaptation activities. The template used to ensure comparability across mitigation actions is the following.

Government priority:

Targets:

Co-benefits:

Finance:

Technology:

Gender:

Mitigation actions were identified from the NDC related information provided by the relevant ministries (MAFF, MISTI, MLMUPC, MME, MoE, MOEYs, MoT, MPWT, and NCDD). These projects were filtered and a list of mitigation projects was prepared. The mitigation projects are distributed among seven mitigation sectors: energy generation, waste, industry, transport, agriculture, building, and the FOLU. Table 22 shows the identified list.

1 Promote sustainable energy practices in manufacturing Garments: 2,291 GgCO2e, 55% by 2030 Bricks: 1,799 GgCO2e, 44% by 2030 Food and Beverage: 1,043 GgCO2e, 25% by 2030 Urban Planning Tools for Climate Change Mitigation and the urban planning solution in three sub cities 3 Application of electrical equipments labelling & MEPS (Lighting, Cooling & Equipment) Reduce 1.2 TWh (29.7%) of electricity use in 2030 4 Improvement of process performance of EE by establishment of energy management in buildings/industries Voluntary scheme for other companies, especially for SMEs to reduce 10% in 2030 5 Public awareness campaigns, DTEBP-EE info centres Reduce 2% of energy consumption in 2030 6 Building codes and enforcement/certification for new buildings and those undergoing major renovation Reduce 10% of electricity consumption in 2030 7 Introduction of efficient electrical motors and boilers Reduce 2.3% of current electricity consumption in 2030 8 Improve sustainability of charcoal production through enforcement of regulations 9 Roadmap study on Integration of RE (Renewable Energy) resources. 25 % of renewable energy in the energy mix (solar, wind, hydro, biomass) by 2030 10 New sanitary landfills with LFG extraction and LFG extraction at the Dangkor Landfill Increase the share of waste disposed at sanitary landfills with LFG extraction from 0% in 2020 to 50% by 2030 and extract LFG from the Dangkor Landfill 11 Composting of biodegradable organic fraction of MSW supplemented with separation of organic waste (at source). If 10% of all MSW generated is composted by 2030 then up to 500 ktCO2e/year of GHG emissions can be avoided by 2030 12 Production of Refuse-Derived Fuel (RDF) from either a) fresh MSW or b) old MSW mined from the Dangkor landfill.

13 Implementation of National 3R strategy MoE Waste -MSW 14 Enhance maintenance and inspection of vehicle (Piloting maintenance and emission inspections of vehicles) 30 vehicle inspection centres in operation by 2030 15 Promote integrated public transport systems in main cities MPWT Passenger transport 16 Reducing GHG emission though off grid street lightening of rural municipality 10 Sangkat of Senmonorom municipality, Kep municipality, and Preah municipality integration of climate change into financial management, institutional arrangement and policy reform by 2028.

17 Bio-digesters construction (85% reduction compared to 2000) (Small size (2-3-4m3) 18 Bio-digesters construction (85% reduction compared to 2000) Medium size(6-8-10m3) 19 Bio-digesters construction (85% reduction compared to 2000) Large size(>10m3) 20 Centralized recycling facility for industrial waste from the garment sector Reduce 108,472 tCO2e/at an average of 10,847 tCO2e/year 22 Toward Battambang city to green city 5 Sangkat of Battambang municipality integration of green city by 2025 23 Shift long distance freight movement from trucks to train MPWT Freight Transport 24 Emission management from factories Monitor air quality at 105 factories annually and provide permit letter on air emission to 90 factories. 90% of factories to be licensed.

25 Increasing the effectiveness and sustainability of agricultural land management techniques (Conservation Agriculture) 26 Organic input agriculture and bio-slurry; and deep placement fertilizer technology 10 Provinces by 2030 28 Promote manure Management through compost making process to reduce carbon emission 25 provinces and cities by 2030 31 Inclusion of performance requirements of Passive Cooling Systems in Building Energy Code of Cambodia 32 Implementation of passive cooling measures in the cities (addressing urban heat island effect [UHIE]), public buildings and commercial buildings.

