The Environment Protection Agency, on behalf of the Government of Sierra Leone is grateful to the UNDP-Climate Promise, for their immense financial support to the process of review and update of the NDC document through the UNDP Sierra Leone country office. The Agency remain beholden to GCCA+WA and CILSS team for the peer review, data generation compilation support to the document. Special thanks to the Consultants, MDAs, Academic institutions, CSOs, NGOs, etc., who contributed in diverse way to this work. We thank the coordinating team for facilitating meetings, consultations and validation of the NDC document.

AFOLU Agriculture, Forestry, Land use and Others Land Use CILSS Permanent Inter-State Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel CORSIA Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation EPA-SL Environment Protection Agency Sierra Leons GCCA+WA Global Climate Change Alliance + West Africa GMDSAP Guidance Material for the Development of States Action Plans IFAD International Funds for Agricultural Development LECRDS Low-Emission Climate-Resilience Development Strategies NARTGA National Reforestation and Timber Governance Agency NC3-SL Third National Communication- Sierra Leone NCCSAP National Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan NWRMA National Water Resources Management Agency REDD+ Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation UNCCD United Nations Convention to combat Desertification UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 3.3 Current and future impacts of climate change 6 4.1.4 Agriculture. Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU) Sectors 20 4.1.8 Coastal Zone Management (including fisheries, coastal ecosystems etc.), 21 4.1.9 Environment (including tourism, land, mineral resources, forestry, etc.) 21 7.2 Capacity building and technology transfer 46 Figure 8: Annual natural hazard occurrence for 1900-2018 (World Bank 2021) 11 Figure 10: River basins of Sierra Leone (Sources: reproduced with permission from the Table 3: Information to facilitate Clarity, Transparency, and Understanding 23 Table 11: Categorisation of proposed adaptation and mitigation actions into conditional and unconditional targets 45 Table 12: Actions for capacity building and technology transfer 46 Table 13: Plan for public engagement (adapted from EPA 2020) 48 Table 14: NDC alignment with and the MTNDP, AU vision 2063 and SDGs, 49 The Paris Agreement (PA) seeks to limit the global temperature increase to under 2C- and towards 1.5C- above pre-industrial levels. This calls for a radical change across countries, reflected in commitments made in their Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). Such a adaptation, being ranked one of the least able countries to adapt to climate change in the world.

The country is highly vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change, with a growing number of people at risk to extreme events, and significant impacts on the economy. This reality drives proposals made in the countrys Medium-Term National Development Plan (MTNDP) in 2019, which both stresses the need for aligning environmental, climate, and economic development plans to stage proactive efforts to mitigate the causes of global warming and help vulnerable citizens in both rural and urban settings to effectively adapt to climate change over the long term.

Sierra Leones NDC responds to Article 4, paragraph 2 of the PA, which requires parties to the UNFCCC to prepare, communicate and maintain successive NDCs that they intend to achieve. It also aligns with the MTNDP, AU Vision 2063, and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). years. Accordingly, the updated NDC is grounded in the countrys development and sectoral policies, strategies, and frameworks. Such an alignment will improve results tracking, identification of potential implementation partners, and maximising local resources. Moreover, demonstrating linkages between the NDC and national and international plans and strategies including which actors at the national, subnational, and sectoral levels to involve in implementation, monitoring, verification, and reporting activities.

With climate risks and impacts affecting various sectors and population groups in different ways, differentiated, sector-based measures for both adaptation and mitigation have been proposed (as project and policy actions) to deal with current and emerging vulnerabilities, as well as contribute to the reduction of Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions. The measures build upon lessons learned and experiences gained from implementing actions in the previous NDC1 and working with international and local development partners on various environmental and climate actions. Development partners and national structures can implement these measures through their own strategies, policies, and operations, although current arrangements for to closing current gaps in data, finance, and project standards.

Accordingly, the NDC envisions to achieve long-term goals for mitigation: a reduction in CO2 emission levels to 5% by 2025, 10% by 2030, and 25% by 2050, with a transformational shift toward a low-emission development pathway, by targeting priority sectors, implementing REDD+ (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation) as well as promoting innovation and technology transfer for sustainable breakthroughs in energy, waste management, transport, agriculture, etc. Technology transfer through private sector partnerships will create new markets, provide jobs, and support economic growth, while reducing GHG emissions.

In terms of adaptation, the objective drawn from the iNAP is to enhance adaptive capacity, strengthen resilience and reduce vulnerability by half by 2030. The NDC seeks to mainstream level while promoting environmental benefits in an integrated manner at the national level. Given the scope for action in the proposed action plans, the Government of Sierra Leone will push for actions that drive synergies at the national and subnational level. Such actions will typically focus on promoting policies and developing institutional links that drive both mitigation and adaptation, highlighting synergies in proposed actions at multiple scales (from local to global), mainstreaming climate considerations into broader development actions, and ensuring that the financing architecture addresses synergies between adaptation and mitigation.

In practice, NDC actions will roll-out broad-based measures covering all main emitters and actions have a total value of around USD 2,764 billion (including both conditional and unconditional contributions).

National contributions send a strong message about the current political commitment to climate action and demonstrate that NDC implementation will be domestically driven and owned- undertaken to strengthen national and subnational institutions and governance systems. At the same time, the Sierra Leone updated NDC measures reflect the growing local focus on merging top-down policy guidance with bottom-up planning, which is essential to a circular learning the long timeframes proposed promote long-range planning and allows for accessing long-term for implementation and the gender and social inclusion issues covered, lays a solid foundation for strategic partnerships and cross-level learning, and grounds measures in social justice.

Overall, the sectors prioritised for both mitigation and adaptation provide a pathway toward strengthening local knowledge systems and improving access to technical knowledge. Moreover, the sectors provide a means of expanding access to renewable energy by increasing access to renewable energy technologies and improving energy efficiency. Likewise, enhanced attention will be given to removing barriers to the adoption of low-carbon technologies in the transport, agriculture, and waste sectors, and limitations to the development and transfer of climate-resilient technologies. Similarly, proposed actions promise to encourage sustainable transport and urban development by shifting from traditional infrastructure to greener alternatives for urban mobility (such as mass transit systems), waste management, and fuel- efficient vehicles. Also, the NDC will enhance the commitment to managing land use, forests, as well as other land use changes to enhance carbon sequestration. These approaches will include targeted policy and institutional interventions that support implementation nationally for generating and disseminating knowledge, and deliberate actions to cultivate and foster partnerships.

Sierra Leone submitted its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) to the UNFCCC in September 2015, setting out its adaptation and mitigation goals. With the entry into force of the Paris Agreement in November 2016, the INDC became Sierra Leones first Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC1). NDC1 was built upon the 2013 Green Growth and the countrys National Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (NCCSAP), as well as other key national policies and guiding documents.

Todays NDC updates and strengthens NDC1 for both the mitigation and adaptation contributions, informed by improved data collection, in-depth technical analysis and extensive has been undertaken to now estimate the countrys mitigation potential and develop quantified conditional and unconditional contributions until 2030.

Approaches used to gather information included organising workshops across the country to consult on various aspects of the document and working with consultants to deliver specific work packages. These methods and procedures for data collection, analysis, and integration are presented in the next section.

The document is divided into the following seven chapters.

Chapter 1 provides an overview of the document, focusing on the relevant articles of the Paris Agreement and defining national circumstances that underlines the actions proposed in the NDC. It also gives an overview of NDC1 actions and the achievements to date.

Chapter 2 describes the revision process, including documents reviewed, stakeholder consultations held, technical assessments are undertaken and validation of the current NDC. Chapter 3 reviews the national circumstances, covering the geographic, climatic, economic, and sociological issues that rationalize the steps put forward in this document for addressing climate change risks, vulnerabilities, and impacts.

Chapter 4 presents the countrys vision for climate change, the strategies and actions that it reflects and builds upon, including various adaptation plans, the LECRDS, the NFCS, climate change policies and strategies, and commitments made at various climate negotiations. Chapter 5 presents contributions for mitigation, highlighting the main sources of emission, changes in emission levels since 2015, and actions for reducing emissions until 2030. Chapter 6 examines previous proposals for adaptation to identify achievements and gaps and delineate next steps. New actions proposed reflect on past commitments, lessons learned from various adaptation interventions, and opportunities for innovation and policy change;

Chapter 7 brings the different strands of the document together by proposing strategies for implementation, including appropriate, sector-based, and gender-transformative plans for mobilising resources, meaningfully engaging the public to increase NDC visibility as well as community and policy learning, increasing social inclusion, influencing policy change, building capacity, and promoting monitoring, reporting, and verification. The chapter also describes the institutional arrangements and organisational structures for implementing the NDC.

Many reforms and developments took place since the submission of the INDC in 2015, which form an important basis for the revision of the NDC. These developments are presented in the table below.

Table 1: List of actions taken in line with the previous NDC1 Developments since 2015 Year Value added to revised NDC Establishment of an Environment Ministry 2019 Institutional framework established for improved coordination of bodies responsible for 2017 Allows for greater synergy and corporation with 2021 Greater access to existing adaptation funds to 2019 Opportunity to align the NGC to this plan and Establishment of a Renewable Energy Directorate 2021 Facilitation the switch to available renewable sources of energy.

2017 To enhance the capacity of the water sector to strengthen its adaptive capacity.

Establishment of a National Disaster Management 2020 Timely intervention to respond to disasters in terms of preparedness and response to disasters events.

Review of the Disaster Management Policy 2021 To update and bring in line with the NDC 2021 To add value for the protection and conservation of carbon sinks.

Development of a National Framework for climate 2020 Will enhance the delivery of climate services to strengthen adaptive capacities of crucial sectors.

2018 Will help to reduce anthropogenic activities that degrades the land.

2021 To guide the implementation of the revised 2017 To establish an incremental baseline and report on the countrys emissions.

2018 To strengthen coordination for the effective productivity.

2018 To respond to sea level rise and its effects. Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action 2020 A vehicle to implement mitigation measures National Biodiversity Action Plan 2017 To enhance carbon sinks though conservation of Development of the Renewable Energy Policy 2016 To guide the transition to low emissions Off-Grid Solar Energy Strategy 2020 Will enable access of the wider populace to Developments since 2015 Year Value added to revised NDC National Renewable Energy Action Plan 2016 To implement actions that are geared towards a These developments provided insights for consultations held with sector experts in 2021 to until 2025 and 2030. The consultation process involved working with various stakeholders to review the progress made with implementing the INDC and identify gaps and actions for the format for bringing together stakeholders who are informed about or have a felt experience of climate change. Overall, the meetings and workshops held helped to problematize concerns about climate risks and propose pathways for adaptation and mitigation moving forward.

This section provides a brief overview of Sierra Leones national circumstances, including the countrys geography and polity, climate and climate change impacts, environment and natural resources, and social and economic characteristics.

Sierra Leone is in the West of Africa and lies between latitudes 7 (6degree 55minute) and 10 (10degree 00minute) degrees North of the equator and longitude 10 (10-degree 14 minutes) and 13 (13-degree 17 minutes) degrees West of the Greenwich Meridian. It is bordered by Liberia to the southeast, Guinea to the northeast and the Atlantic Ocean to the West. The country is divided into four main physical regions, namely coastal plains, interior lowland plains, interior plateau, and hills and mountains.

Complex (SLCLC): the Scarcies River Estuary (SRE), Sierra Leone River Estuary (SLRE), Bonthe-Sherbro River Estuary (BSRE), and Yawri Bay. The SRE hosts historically important localities such as Tombo, Tasso, Bunce Island, and the Queen Elizabeth II Quay (the largest natural harbour in West Africa). Generally, the SLCLC is characterised by sea mounts, large gulfs, offshore banks, shoals and islands, and upwelling. It also comprises the bays and estuaries of the Rokel, Great and Little Scarcies, Sherbro, Jong, Moa, Sewa, and Mano.

Figure 2: Regions of the SLCLC (source: WABiCC 2018) The interior lowland plains, the largest of the four physical regions, extend from the coastal area. They rise to elevations of 200m in the east where they are separated from the plateau by distinct escarpments. At the edge of the lowland plains is the interior plateau, which covers 22% of the total land area and is made up principally of granite. The plateau region seldom rises above 700m and is composed of alluvial ironstone gravel in the south-eastern region, while the northern end is composed of weathered outcrops of granitic rocks. The eastern and southern parts comprise dissected hills. In the north and east of the country are found two of the highest mountains. The highest peak on the Loma Mountains is Bintumani, which rises to 1945m while Sankan-Biriwa on the Tingi Hills, rises to 1805m. The Freetown peninsula is made up of dissected mountainous Peaks with Sugar Loaf and Picket Hills being the highest.

24C to 28C throughout the year. However, the daily maximum temperature can reach 35 C while the daily minimum temperature is above 20 OC. The country's average annual temperature has increased by 0.8C since 1960, an average rate of 0.18C per decade (McSweeny et el 2010). Temperatures often remain below 30 C (86 F) during the day during 2300 mm to 3100 mm. Rainfall peaks from June to September when it exceeds the monthly average of 250 mm (10 in). It can often be torrential in coastal areas, especially in July and August. Monthly climatologies of precipitation and mean temperature between 1991 and 2020 for the regions are provided in Figures 3. For each region, the seasonal cycle of temperature and precipitation is similar, but the distribution of monthly precipitation is location specific.

The largest changes in precipitation occurred between July and August each year, with more precipitation recorded in the western province. At the same time, the greatest increase in temperature was observed between March and April, with the greatest increase occurring in the Northern Province (see fig.3 below).

Figure 3: Monthly climatology of both precipitation and temperature (source: SLMet, 2021) 3.3 Current and future impacts of climate change Agriculture is an important livelihood, primary food source and large component of the economy. Current climatic conditions are ideal for the production of the primary crops: rice, sugar cane, banana, coconut, citrus, cocoa, pineapple, yam and cassava. With regional climate modelling projections demonstrating increased temperatures (approx. +1.7 C for RCP4.5 and 2.3C for RCP8.5) and rainfall changes from -5% to 5% with high variability, this is likely to change agriculture practices and production. For instance, rice being the staple food crop in Sierra Leone and being grown mainly in smallholder farming under rain-fed conditions, is compounded by the persistent rural poverty and farmers without insurance or the resources of pest and disease outbreaks.

Table 2: Projected precipitation and temperature changes in Sierra Leone The extreme events are expected to increase in the future. For instance, RCMs projection for RCP4.5 and RPC8.5 has shown a significant positive trend of warm spell days and high rainfall events (Fig. 4). The increased occurrence of warm spells is going to increase crop water requirement and therefore play a key role in crop and livestock production by reducing water could significantly affect food security.

Figure 4: 90th percentile rainfall (top) and Warm spell day (bottom) trend in Sierra Leone Water quality and availability are highly vulnerable to climate impacts. Major water uses with implications for social vulnerability and poverty.

Mano River fell by 30% between 1971 and 1989. This has large impacts on access to water since about 80% of the rural population receives water from surface sources, including many streams and ponds. These streams also dry up during severe droughts which are likely to become more common. There is also seasonal variation where 40% of the protected water points suffer water shortages in the dry season (USAID 2016), demonstrating that existing vulnerability is already acute.

Figure 5: Change in cooling degree days in Sierra Leone -Freetown (SLMet, 2021) Figure 6: Potential for drought due to changes in water availability (SLMet, 2021). Drought (in red) and Wet (in blue) conditions in Sierra Leone for period 2021-2080 Climate change is having impacts on coastal communities, fisheries, and coastal environments which are important ecosystems and support livelihoods including tourism. Decreasing river sediments are likely to damage coastal economies and the food security for coastal and riverside populations. With sea level rise, loss of coastal ecosystems inundation from major rivers, flash floods during the rainy season and saline intrusions due to decreased low water flows in the dry season, there are increasing challenges to livelihoods. Coastal erosion is already a significant challenge in some coastal areas in Sierra Leone (such as Konakridee, Lakka, Hamilton and Plantain Island) where the coastline is shifting by about 4 to 6 meters a year (WA BiCC 2019). Sea level rise has the effect of augmenting a decrease in the quality and quantity of ground water resources otherwise caused by human activities.

Infrastructure in Sierra Leone is vulnerable to climate impacts across the country. This is maintenance. Roads are the primary mode of transport with limited or non-existent rail. River transport systems are often impassable during the current rainy season. The coast, which will be impacted by sea level rise, beach erosion and coastal flooding, is densely populated and is an important economic centre with ports and tourist facilities. Coastal communities such as Kroobay, Moa Wharf lack flood escape routes due to the low elevation of roads. Other roads also flood during the rainy season. This makes it difficult for farmers to transport their agricultural goods. Additionally, as future infrastructure investment occurs construction materials and design should be climate sensitive and consider heat stress and flood risk.

Water and sanitation infrastructure are sensitive to storm surge, sea level rise and flooding. Already a large percentage of the population lack access to clean water and sanitation facilities. their operation often depends on gravity flow and can easily be inundated by water level rise. Therefore, climate-sensitive innovative designs of sanitation infrastructure are critical in adapting to climate change.

Waterborne diseases are also expected to increase with more frequent and intense flooding. Currently the heavy rains have increased the likelihood of the outbreak of communicable diseases. More intense dry seasons (with increased temperatures) in the north and west have been linked to reduced water quality, warm spells, and disease outbreaks. Warmer seas contribute to toxic algae bloom and increased cases and food poisoning from consumption of shellfish and reef fish. The Ebola outbreak revealed a deficient health system, including understaffed, unavailable or unaffordable health care that will be further stressed by climate change impacts (USAID 2016).

Ecosystems will be severely impacted by climate change and existing development stressors. which will further stress ecosystems. Land cover is expected to change. 60% of the country of forest management include, amongst others, poor governance, weak law enforcement, lack of coordination among sector ministries and illegal harvesting. Deforestation also increases both landslides and floods, by removing tree roots that stabilize the ground.

Loko and Kambia Districts, the Newton catchment area, Pujehun and Bo areas, Kenema and Moyamba Districts, and coastal beaches of the Western Area Peninsula (Government of Sierra Leone 2018). There are also transboundary issues as heavy rainfall in neighbouring countries may cause floods in Sierra Leone due to the overflowing of three rivers: Great Scarcies and Little Scarcies rivers from Guinea and Mano from Liberia (World Bank 2017). There are also cascading impacts from flooding. Many communities in Sierra Leone, especially the rural poor, depend on streams and swamps, which dry up during severe droughts. Floods overwhelm existing systems, contaminating drinking water and creating sewage overflows.

Figure 7: Key national hazard statistics for 1985-2018 (World Bank 2021) Figure 8: Annual natural hazard occurrence for 1900-2018 (World Bank 2021) minerals.

0.7% (see fig. 13 adapted from Massaquoi 2018). This explains the increase in degraded land areas across the country, now identified and mapped as hotspots by the UNCCD target setting report (see fig. 14 adapted GoSL 2018).

Water resources include atmospheric (treated under the Climate sub-section above), surface and groundwater. Sierra Leone has nine major river systems. The Rokel/Seli, Pampana/Jong, Sewa and Waanje systems originate from within the country, as do the numerous coastal streams and creeks; the Great and Little Scarcies and Moa Rivers originate from the Fouta Djallon Plateau in the Republic of Guinea, and the Mano River originates from the Republic of Liberia. These rivers range in length from 160 km for the Great Scarcies to 430 km for the Sewa River; their catchment areas range from 2,530 km2 for the coastal streams and creeks, to 14,140 km2 for the Sewa River. The total mean annual runoff from the river basins is of the order of 160 km3, with monthly runoff following rainfall variability. Internally, renewable water resources are over 29,000 km3 per capita, which is six times the average for Africa.

Produced groundwater is estimated at 50 km3 annually and much of this (80%) overlaps between surface and ground water.

Forest Division; and 23% are within a wetland and marine ecosystem protected areas (ARD 2010). The 50 forest reserves are under the custody of the State occupying approximately and 30,000 hectares of constituted community forests. In 2017, Sierra Leone revised its National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) to assess the status of biodiversity, including forest resources, and propose action plans for sustainable management.

Figure 11: Protected and conservation areas of Sierra Leone (UNEP 2015) Analysis of the land use data by CILSS highlights the most significant land cover changes in Sierra Leone, including the loss of woodland and forest areas across the country. The primary forest losses occurred in Tonkolili, Kono, and Koinadugu districts. Sierra Leone has lost over 34% of its forests between 1975 and 2018. This forest degradation is most noticeable in the eastern region. Most of the forested areas have been degraded to savannahs and agricultural land. The expansion of cultivated land, slash-and-burn agriculture and logging have been the dominant factors explaining forest loss. As for agricultural areas, they have increased by 76.57% between 1975 and 2018 with a strong expansion from 2000 (Fig.10).

Figure 12: Expansion of the forest degradation (left) and agricultural land (right) contribute about 10% of GDP, and fish is a major source of animal protein for over 80% of the countrys population. In addition, the sector currently employs over 500,000 Sierra Leoneans, with women at the forefront of many activities (particularly fish processing and marketing). The production of industrial fisheries has been around 20,000 tonnes, mainly exported with mainly for the local market with little or no value addition. It is estimated that wide-scale improvement of fisheries activities has the potential to bring the sectors employment levels close to one million people and revenue earning potential of $60 million annually. Therefore, food security and poverty reduction objectives.

Furthermore, there are approximately 147 known species of wild mammals, 172 known breeding bird species, 67 known reptile species, 35 known amphibian species, 750 species of known species of fish. In 2010, more than 5500 Chimpanzees were found, double the number previously thought to live in the country. This is the second largest population of the endangered subspecies of western chimpanzee, after Guinea, with the largest density in the Loma area, 2.69 individuals per sq. km, and the Outamba-Kilimi, with 1.21 individuals per sq. km. Several species of whales and the African manatee can also be found in the country, along with 630 known species of birds, ten of which are considered endangered, including the rufous fishing-owl and the Gola malimbe. There are 67 known species of reptiles, three of which are endangered: the Nile crocodile, the slender-snouted crocodile which lives in forest streams, and the dwarf crocodile found in mangrove swamps. All the species of sea turtles can be found the Sherbro and Turtle Islands These species are under some form of protection in coastal and terrestrial ecosystems by the Government of Sierra Leone (based on review in Martiny, Massaquoi, and Blackwell 2021).

Sierra Leone has had an unstable modern history marked by a civil war from 1991-2002 and socio-economic repercussions and contributed to the underlying vulnerabilities which persists today. The country is one of the poorest countries in sub-Saharan Africa and globally, with a GDP per capita of US$499 in 2017. It ranked 182 out of 188 countries on the United Nations 2020 Human Development Index, below the average for countries with similar GDP per capita (UNDP 2020a). The overall poverty rate in Sierra Leone is 57 percent, with 10.8 percent of the population living in extreme poverty (Government of Sierra Leone 2019). The Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis (CFSVA 2015- MAFFS/WFP/FAO) reported that 49% (3,475,135.37) of people in Sierra Leone are food insecure, of which the majority are poor smallholder farmers that are living in the rural areas of the country (Government of Sierra Leone 2018).

The population is around 7.4 million (2018). The population growth rate has increased rapidly from 1.8 percent between 1985 and 2004 to 3.2 percent between 2004 and 2015. This has led to a 40 percent increase from about 5 million in 2004 to more than 7 million today. At the current rate, the population will reach 10 million people by 2026 (Government of Sierra Leone 2019). Forty percent of Sierra Leones population are youth. There is high unemployment among low and semi-skilled youth most of whom were unable to complete their education due to the civil war. These challenges have been exacerbated by two recent economic shocks, the Ebola epidemic and the collapse of iron ore commodity prices, which lead to shrinking GDP growth. Since then, economic growth has fluctuated. Real GDP growth was weak in 2018 at 3.5% but improved slightly to an estimated 5.0% in 2019, driven by agriculture and services, and in the first half of 2019 by extractives (African Development Bank 2019).

Development Bank 2019). Covid-19 has added additional shocks and GDP growth is expected to fall to 1.7%. This is primarily due to the decline in commodity prices and depressed trade, FDI inflows, tourism revenue following travel restrictions and declines in remittances. An analysis by the African Development Bank projects inflation to reach between 15.3% and 17% (African Development Bank Group 2020).

Agriculture plays a crucial role in ensuring food security, poverty reduction and improving public health. Agriculture employs more than half of the countrys formal and informal workforce and accounts for about half of GDP and is a women dominated sector (Government of Sierra Leone 2019). Although 75 percent of its land is arable, only about 10 percent is of Sierra Leone 2018). Farmers, however, have limited access to improved varieties of seeds, equipment and fertilizers. Additionally, farming is mostly rainfed, making it more vulnerable about 10% of GDP, is a primary livelihood for 500,000 people and a main source of animal led primarily by women, similar to agriculture, making womens work more climate sensitive (Government of Sierra Leone 2018).

Sierra Leone ranked 46 out of 54 countries on the banks Africa Infrastructure Development Index in 2020 (AfDB 2020). This points to the significant infrastructure investment needed infrastructural landscape in Sierra Leone has had a tremendously negative impact on economic diversification, health and livelihoods. Infrastructure is a centrepiece of the Medium-Term Development Plan and key to Sierra Leones long-term development goals of becoming a middle-income country.

80% of the population with related significant environmental and public health impacts such as deforestation and respiratory illnesses. As Sierra Leone addresses its climate goals in an integrated way, renewable and reliable energy sources are an essential component.

Many of the major causes of death and disability in Sierra Leone can be traced to challenges with environmental health and sanitation. Most of the countrys population obtain water from unsafe open water sources and waterborne diseases are very common. There is also a dearth of sanitation facilities and almost 30% of the rural population practices open defecation. Sanitation is far below the reasonable SDG target of 66% for the country and the budget allocation for the sector is less than .02 percent of GDP (Government of Sierra Leone 2019).

Infrastructure issues are compounded as more people move into urban centres. In Sierra Leone, urbanization has been accelerating since the civil war. The share of the population living in urban areas almost doubled from 21% in 1967 to almost 40% in 2015, with a high concentration in the capital Freetown, which has grown to a population of more than 1 million. This growth is now rapidly increasing. From 2004 to 2015 the population has increased 43% from approximately 5 million to approximately 7 million (Statistics Sierra Leone 2016). Urbanization has not been accompanied by sufficient resources to plan and manage this fast growth and cities have lacked the financing to make the necessary investments to cope with the accelerated demand for infrastructure and services. This has climate risk implications as settlements or working in the informal sector.

Sierra Leone has a paradigm shift of increase in rural urban migration in search of better waste generation and high demand in public services including solid waste management services. The waste sector is branded by improper waste management. Urban expansion across the country has exacerbated the problems of waste, sanitation, and drain flows.

Freetown the capital of Sierra Leone has a population of around 1.2 million, and a waste generation per capita per day of 0.5 kg, at least 600 metric tons of waste could be generated per day or 219,000 metric ton of waste annually ( Ngeba A. and Bertin, 2020). The increasing population in cities and towns in Sierra Leone is quite likely to increase the amount and diversity of wastes and subsequently the relative quantum of emissions of GHG from the sector, especially methane (CH4) from dump sites, and carbon dioxide (CO2) and precursor gases (NOx, CO).

Women are 51% of the population and suffer from gender inequality and discrimination. Sierra Leone historically stands in the bottom ten of the Gender Development Index (UNDP 2020b). protection. Increased poverty among women in Sierra Leone results from a combination of factors, which include limited skills and knowledge; unfriendly market structures that concentrate women in lower paying and time-consuming work and restrict their access to capital and credit; traditional family structures perpetuating gender inequality through patriarchal norms of property ownership and inheritance; discrimination in the public domain; weak and unequal trade and economic patterns (USAID, 2019).

Over the past decade, the government has developed and enacted a range of national laws, policies, and strategies to address gender inequality. This included the passage of the three gender justice laws, which respectively address domestic violence, improve womens access to land through inheritance, and strengthen womens rights in marriage and divorce through a registration process. Several government entities have also been established to support gender equality including the Ministry of Social Welfare, Gender and Childrens Affairs; the Human Rights Commission; the Family Support Unit in the Sierra Leone Police; and the Legal Aid Board. This institutional development, however, has been insufficient. For example, women occupy less than 20 percent of elected positions although the Gender Equality and Womens Empowerment Bill, which establishes a minimum of 30 percent representation of women in governance at all levels. The Medium-Term Development Plan seeks to address this issue and includes empowering women as a key focus including to support implementation of current legislation.

Sierra Leone recognises the importance and emergency of combating climate change, which poses a major global threat and a common concern of humankind, as rising temperatures activities, ecosystems and the regenerative capacity of the planet.

Sierra Leones vision for adaptation is drawn from the iNAP, with the objective to enhance adaptive capacity, strengthen resilience and reduce vulnerability by half by 2030 through increased risk awareness, improvements in rule compliance, increased institutional capacity and an integrated approach to adaptation in development policy and programs across sectors and scales. The above visions support proposals in the National Climate Change Policy (NCCP), which was revised in early 2021.

These national goals contribute to achieving the Global Goal on adaptation by reducing strategies, and prioritizing and planning for adaptation. They also ensure that the adaptation component of the NDC becomes a strategic and ambitious vehicle for capturing, reporting and updating commitments and progress, as well as aligning long-term national development priorities with the SDG framework. Moreover, the goals contribute to improving the delivery of climate services as prescribed in the National Framework for Climate Services (NFCS). The NFCS will benefit a wide range of sectors and climate intervention areas, including biodiversity, health, energy, agriculture, human settlements, water etc. By implementing the NDC, key actors, including SLMet, can produce sector-specific products to enable informed decision-making in the context of the effective, efficient and equitable delivery of climate services.

Sierra Leones vision on mitigation is drawn on the LECRDS, with the objective to achieve GHG emission reductions in priority sectors through well targeted programmes of activities and projects, including through the implementation of REDD+ (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation) programmes, which can deliver significant mitigation and adaptation co-benefits in Sierra Leone.

Most importantly Sierra Leones vision for fighting against climate change through the implementation of both mitigation and adaptation components of the revised NDC is embedded in the Medium-Term National Development Plan, specifically in its Clusters 2, 3, 5 and 7 which and non-climate objectives at the national level in a consistent and well-coordinated manner. Considering the nature and extent of Sierra Leones climate impacts and low adaptive capacity, the commitments made in this NDC are fair and ambitious, and are based on conditions of goals. The conditions are ambitious in relation to the global limit of 1.5C and present a significant enhancement from the previous NDC1 by adding new sectors, strategies, and policies (enhanced mitigation and adaptation components). Overall, the measures are considered transparent as they are presented by sector and defined through extensive consultations with stakeholders at all levels and from different backgrounds.

The priority sectors for the NDC are identified based on an analysis of national priorities contained in various climate change documents, as well as prescriptions by the UNFCCC for NDC development. For mitigation, the priority sectors include energy; industrial processes and product use; waste; Agriculture, Forestry, and Other Land Uses (AFOLU); and the blue economy, while for adaptation, the priority sectors are Agriculture and Food Security, Water Resources and Energy, Coastal Zone Management (including fisheries, coastal ecosystems etc.), Environment (including tourism, land, mineral resources, forestry, etc.), Disaster management, Gender and Social Inclusion (focusing on youth, women, elderly, persons with disabilities), and hard and soft infrastructure (including for transportation, WASH, etc).

Although mitigation and adaptation measures are handled separately in this document, due to differences in priorities for the measures and segregated planning and implementation policies at international and national levels, a few synergistic approaches for implementation are proposed based on the benefits they could bring at multiple scales and in multiple sectors.

Priorities for energy focus on reducing emissions from power plants and other energy fossil through the deployment of renewable energy technologies and increased efficiency of energy sources. Generally, the sector could contribute immensely to emissions reduction through the implementation of the Integrated Resource Plan (IRP) developed by the MCCU and the offgrid solar energy strategy developed by the Foresign and Commonwealth Development Office (FCDO). Both documents complement actions in the sector to promote universal access to clean energy by 2030 and meet targets for emissions reduction by 2025.

Amendment to the Montreal Protocol on substances that deplete the Ozone Layer, as well as Environmental Management Plans (EMP) adopted by various producers in compliance with the Environment Protection Agency Act of 2008 (Amended in 2010).

Priorities identified for waste management reflect efforts in various sectors to effectively manage waste from agricultural, healthcare, and other practices and sources. The priorities build upon national plans for managing animal waste, general solid waste, and other hazardous substances that endanger health and ecosystem vitality.

4.1.4 Agriculture. Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU) Sectors AFOLU cuts across sectors that contribute to land use change and land cover change for various practices such as slash and burn and the use of pesticides and chemical fertilizers. It also focuses on the net carbon gain of large-scale agro-investment land leases across the country, such as monoculture oil palm and sugarcane plantations run by SOCFIN and Sunbird Energy respectively. Efforts to reclaim mined-out areas, or the general impacts of mining on forest carbon sequestration and soil carbon is also addressed.

As a priority for climate change mitigation, the blue economy in Sierra Leone incorporates traditional maritime industries such as fisheries, tourism, mining, boat building, aquaculture systems, and carbon stored in mangrove and seagrass ecosystems. The fisheries sector for instance is a major source of jobs and a key driver of mangrove deforestation in coastal communities in Sierra Leone, which can have a major impact on the countrys blue carbon stock. These analyses inform an understanding of the current change in the countrys blue carbon stock, including losses or gains overtime in mangrove and seagrass resources.

Agriculture and food security are prioritised for adaptation because climate change is already well as those at subsistence level. In the future, changes in mean rainfall and temperature as well as the increase in extreme events will affect agriculture and livestock practices. At the same time, many impacts, such as increased land degradation and soil erosion, changes in water availability, more frequent and more intense pest and disease outbreaks as well as disasters need to be addressed to reduce food security risks.

The water sector is prioritised for adaptation because future strategies will need to address many emerging trends driven by climate change. These include both demand and supply side renewable energy sources through changes in water availability for hydropower, impacts on thermal power plants and energy infrastructure.

4.1.8 Coastal Zone Management (including fisheries, coastal ecosystems etc.), The coastal zone and the resources they provide are priorities for adaptation because climate change will impact the health, function and productivity of coastal ecosystems, thus impacting the health and welfare of coastal communities and the people that depend on these natural resources. Climate change will have significant and immediate consequences for the countrys coasts, the goods and services provided by coastal ecosystems, and coastal inhabitants. This and the accelerated spread of exotic and invasive species.

4.1.9 Environment (including tourism, land, mineral resources, forestry, etc.) Tourism is prioritised for adaptation to reduce the business risks of tourism companies and protect their natural capital (such as beaches, rainforests, and biodiversity) and ecosystem for development in the country and undermine resilience in various communities.

Gender is a cross-cutting concern for adaptation planning because women and girls are subject to a disproportionate amount of risk from climate-related natural disasters. Risks during and social norms, breakdowns in law and order, and disrupted livelihoods. Women, girls and persons necessary stakeholders in effective adaptation to climate change. The NDC considers gender- disability, reduce gender inequality, and improve adaptation and resilience outcomes.

In order to contribute to the mitigation of global GHG emissions, Sierra Leones commitment is to reduce its domestic GHG emissions of 10% by 2030 as compared to a no-policy scenario of 2015 to 2030, with an intermediary indicative mitigation target of 5% reduction by 2025 against the same baseline. In the longer term, Sierra Leones mitigation ambition is to cut GHG emission by 25% in 2050 with the inclusion of additional sectors and gases in the successive NDCs with clear and measurable mitigation targets and specific actions. Depending on the light of its national circumstances.

A description of the coverage of conditional and unconditional contributions is provided below.

Unconditional contributions include efforts to enhance sinks and reservoirs of GHG through expansion of the forest cover by planting five (5) million trees over the next five (5) years (Presidential Pronouncement, June 5, 2020), and to reduce GHG emissions through policies and measures aimed at promoting a transition to off-grid renewable energy systems, setting quality standards for improving energy efficiency, increasing access to environmentally sound waste management infrastructure, testing vehicle emissions, improving road infrastructure, and restoring mined-out areas.  Conditional contributions include specific emissions-reduction actions, such as policies or mitigation actions like advancing a feed-in tariff for renewable energy technologies, phasing out fossil fuel subsidies, gradually converting to no-tillage agricultural practices, reducing methane emissions from wastewater and providing a nutrient-rich digestate that can be used as a fertilizer, developing incineration facilities to reduce CH4 emissions from landfill sites, investment in reuse and recycling technology, e- mobility and mass transportation initiatives, and new REDD+ and blue carbon initiatives.

Further information to facilitate Clarity, Transparency, and Understanding (CTU) of conditional and unconditional contributions is presented below.

Table 3: Information to facilitate Clarity, Transparency, and Understanding NDC time frame 2020 to 2030 (NDC to be revised in 2025) Type of commitment Sectoral policies and measures Reference year 2015 (the year applies to a baseline scenario) Scope and coverage Sierra Leone prioritises the main sector categories in the IPCC 2006 GHG inventory guidelines (i.e., energy, industrial process and product utilization emissions (IPPU), agriculture, forestry and land use emissions (AFOLU), Waste and others.

It mainly provides emissions levels for CO2 (N2O, CH4, and SO2 are covered for select sources only). Emissions from Energy (mainly from combustion) and waste are included.

Agriculture, Forestry, and Other Land Uses (AFOLU) are not defined as separate sectors in the NDC.

The NDC compares proposed actions with previous commitments (in NDC1) and includes adaptation actions with mitigation co-benefits such as energy efficiency, renewable energy, water and wastewater management, urban planning, marine protection, and reduced desertification. The exact quantity of co-benefits in units of CO2-eq will be provided by the next review date of the NDC.

(Gender and Social Inclusion) mainstreaming. Furthermore, corresponding detailed information on how planned policies and measures will support the achievement of the SDGs, AU Vision 2063, and the SDGs is provided. At the same time, all national circumstances relevant to the NDC are covered, including the social and economic consequences of proposed actions.

The NDC contains a general description of how actions will be monitored and verified, including indicators for all the sectors prioritised. The country has included measurement indicators based on guidelines provided by OECD in 2021, which relies on best practice guidelines provided by the UNFCCC.

Fairness and ambition The NDC describes grounds for considering NDC targets to be an ambitious contribution relating to the global limit of 1.5C, although this has not been substantiated by references to national and international analyses in the equity literature (for example, the Climate Reference Equity Calculator, Climate Action Tracker or others). These gaps will be filled by the next review of the NDC in 2025.

Sierra Leone explicitly links its NDC target to the objectives set out in Article 2 of the UNFCCC and refers to the Low Emissions Carbon Resilient Development Strategy (LECRDS) which set a national policy goal for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD)+ in 2010.

Sierra Leone will explore mechanisms for cooperation as provided under Art. 6 of the PA.

Energy: The countrys NDC considers the transition to Renewable Energy Technologies (RETs) a major means of reducing current emission levels. The goal is to improve energy efficiency and increase access to grid connections by 42% in 2025 and offgrid mini-grid and solar stand-alone systems by 27% and 10% respectively in 2030. Opportunities for expanding electricity generation, transmission, and distribution through a Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) Compact will be explored to increase access and promote technology dissemination.

Industrial processes and product use: The NDC proposes investments in reuse and recycling technology to create employment opportunities for youth, as well as actions to phase down fluorinated gases in accordance with the Kigali amendment to the Montreal Protocol.

Waste: The NDC will use assessments of the capital citys waste burden by the World Bank and waste-related emissions in the Third National Communications to set targets for reducing methane emissions from landfills and design a strategy for using appropriate technology to produce a nutrient-rich digestate that can be used for food production. Actions to reduce CO2 emissions while using technology to spur waste-derived business for youth and women in poor communities. Transport: Sierra Leone will use lessons from the Integrated Resilient Urban Mobility Project (IRUMP) to develop plans and strategies for building sustainable transport mechanisms (including mass transit systems, fuel-efficient vehicles, and climate-smart mobility measures that improve urban planning and enhance access to public infrastructure in cities. The country also commits to implementing performance standards aimed at vehicle purchase and use taxes, low GHG fuels, and incentives for vehicle demand reduction.

AFOLU: Sierra Leone will adopt appropriate technologies for running large scale management of agricultural and forestry residue, manure, household kitchen and garden waste, and biosolids (organic solids from treated sewage). Technologies and tools for reducing food waste by improving value chains, and new REDD+ initiatives targeting established protected and community conservation areas will be adopted. Skills transfer for developing a national forest inventory and forest management information system will also be promoted.

Blue Economy: Sierra Leone will develop a blue carbon initiative for the Sierra Leone River and Bonthe-Sherbro River Estuaries to conserve vast mangrove and seagrass resources while sequestering tree and soil organic carbon.

Energy: Sierra Leone proposes to implement the revised National Energy Policy and Strategic Plan (2020), the Integrated Resource Plan (2019), and National Electrification Roadmap (2020), focusing on the role offgrid energy sources could play in achieving universal access and energy efficiency. Focused plans such as policies for clean cooking and the offgrid solar energy strategy (2020) will be useful in improving quality control measures, creating opportunities for private investment, addressing ambiguities around ownership of environmental attributes for solar investments, and fostering citizen buy-in.

Industrial Processes and Product Use (IPPU): Sierra Leone will regulate IPPUs by domesticating the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol, enforcing requirements under Environmental Assessments conducted by industry players, conducting energy audits and setting performance standards for energy efficiency and waste management.

Waste: Sierra Leone commits to waste mitigation by increased access to solid waste management infrastructure, to reduce emissions from treatment, transportation, and disposal.

Transport: Sierra Leone makes a commitment to develop and implement policies and strategies that limit the age of used vehicles imported into the country, promote emission testing for all heavy types of machinery and vehicles, ensure quality control for spare parts for all types of vehicles, and improve road infrastructure. The country also commits to on-road efficiency improvements, including consumer education and vehicle maintenance practices.

AFOLU: The NDC seeks to reduce emissions from AFOLU by reforesting about 14000 ha of degraded lands, as announced by the President in 2020, as well as by implementing the national policy on reclaiming mined-out lands, and meeting targets set for land degradation neutrality by 2030. The country also commits to the rehabilitation of watershed areas, reducing agricultural open burning, and installing small-scale biogas plants.

Blue Economy: Sierra Leone proposes plans to restore, enhance, and manage about 5000 ha of its vastly degraded mangrove resources over the next 10 years. The country also proposes to support the scaling of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) and energy-efficient deployments in fishing boats, coastal recreational facilities, and fish landing sites. Similarly, Sierra Leone commits to increasing support to smallholder (on-farm) and commercial (off-farm) aquaculture experiments as an approach to increasing food security, employment, and income generation at the local level.

The Third National Communication (TNC) revealed that Energy generation contributed largely (99%) to the GHG emission for 2005 (about 20340.20 Gg of CO2) in Sierra Leone. The increasing use of domestic individual diesel generators due to the lack of a well-functioning national grid system for electricity could explain this excessive consumption of fuel. The to GHG emissions in the country is waste, emitting 151.68Gg of CO2 specifically from landfills. Industrial processes contribute modestly (0.01955Gg CO2) to GHG emissions with cement production as the main source. The overall CO2 emission is projected to increase by 5% and 6% by 2025 and 2030 respectively from the baseline 2015.

Table 4: Projection of CO2 emissions by fuel type (in GgCO2 e.) Methane emission is dominated by waste (about 93% of the total emissions) and agriculture especially livestock waste (about 4%). Both CH4 and N2O emissions are projected to increase by 1% by 2025 from the baseline 2015 (Table 5).

Table 5: 15-year projection of annual GHG Emissions (in MtCO2e) (source: Draft SL-BUR 1, The above projections will be reviewed by the Fourth National Communications, which will be developed in 2023. It will offer stakeholders in the country an opportunity to further contribute to designing and implementing mitigation measures based on technically sound assessments. The process will involve GHG inventory preparation, mitigation options analysis, and forward planning to ensure key considerations are integrated into relevant social, economic, and environmental policies and actions.

The strategy for implementing mitigation measures is made up of three main required components: mitigation goals, mitigation actions, and an action plan for implementation. These provide a framework to identify, prioritize and implement actions to reduce climate risks and vulnerabilities.

The mitigation strategy fully takes account of gaps and achievements made with the implementation of mitigation measures since 2015, when the INDC of Sierra Leone was elaborated before COP21 to the UNFCCC where the Paris Agreement has been adopted. Table 6: Climate mitigation progress since 2015 economic growth.

All sectors  Inter-ministerial committee established for coordination.

All Sectors  Sierra Leone Meteorological Agency Act of Leone.

Waste  Municipal solid waste collection enhanced economy.

Transport  An Integrated and Resilient Urban Mobility Based on the analysis above, the following gaps have been identified:

Most of the strategies lacked concrete actions and targets, linked partly to a lack of institutional capacity. This is gradually changing with the growing appetite for climate mitigation by both public and private entities;

There are capacity gaps in project design for climate change mitigation, hence the low delivery on some of the proposals made previously  Limited data and research capacity of the country to support implementation and monitoring of mitigation actions.

To fill gaps, this NDC proposes the following mitigation actions, to be implemented by 2025 (initial timeline for reviewing the NDC, and 2030 (end line for achieving measures proposed for mitigation). Table 7 below proposes an action plan with timelines, responsibilities, and costs, as well as a sense of how mitigation actions will be prioritised for implementation Table 7: Table 7: Strategies for implementing mitigation actions until 2030 Strategies Goal/Objectives Actions Sectors 1-Energy; 2-Waste; 3-Industrial processes and product use;

4-AFOLU;

5-Infrastructure;

Objective 3 :

Review existing policies, plans and regulations to mainstream climate change actions.

Enhance technical and human capacities of MoEnv, EPA and SLMet to facilitate the implementation, monitoring and reporting of NDC actions.

Establish a centralised climate change MRV system at EPA/SLMet to enhance data generation analysis and management.

Develop a communication and visibility strategy for Enhance technical and human capacities of their relevant emissions.

Switching and promotion for renewable energy (Solar Energy Provider of alternative energy sources such as Biofuels (from Promoting briquettes made from grass and other waste carbon sink.

Promote access to off-grid solar energy sources/ Street lightening in public places and buildings using energy performance standard.

Gradually phasedown fluorinated gases with climate friendly phasedown schedule of the Kigali amendment to the Support private sector led initiative for the promotion of clean Monitor and track emission from the extractive and manufacturing sector and regulate actions through environment social health and impact assessment Development of the BIO energy policy and strategy processes.

Promote the use of clean and renewable energy in the Promote grid and/or on-site renewable power production to Ensure reclamation of mine out are by extractive industries through a progressive rehabilitation and address legacy Monitor and track emission from the extractive and manufacturing sector and regulate actions through an as a major carbon sink.

Develop a national forest inventory and forest management Develop new REDD+ initiatives for terrestrial forest Reforest14,000 hectares degraded economic and agro- Develop REDD+ initiative for the Mangrove reserve in the Increase waste management infrastructure and ease access 400,000,000 Promote waste to energy through the extraction gas Develop incineration facilities in Freetown and other major facilities to reduced CH4 emissions from landfill sites Reducing methane emissions from wastewater and providing a nutrient-rich digestate that can be used as a fertilizer Investment in reuse and recycling technology and create employment opportunity for youth, through the circular economy approach.

Development of commercial scale aerobic composting systems for agricultural and forestry residue, manure, food processing, household kitchen and garden waste, and biosolids (organic solids from treated sewage). Reduction in CH4 emissions, since methane-producing microbes are not active in the presence of oxygen.

Enforcement of by-laws for land use management and water Established Watershed and fresh water committee that are gender sensitive for responsible and sustainable water Review and update of National Laws towards Water Sheds Capacity building and sensitization of communities to waste Building the Capacity of community Youth to transform Designing and improvement of provincial and feeder roads using Climate resilient surfacing materials.

Mass transportation (rail, road and water) for passengers and Quality control for spare parts for all types of vehicles Promote emission testing for all heavy types of machinery economy.

Development of transport infrastructure to incorporate Introduce E-mobility programme and plans to promote the use of electric buses, passenger vehicles (cars) and motor tricycles, resulting in displaced conventional vehicle sales, transport fuel imports and associated GHG emissions. Develop strategy on the age limit of vehicles imported into deforestation.

Using modern machinery and technology to increased Shifting from high to low and wetland to reduce Organic manure to reduce fertilizer use that has the tendency of depleting the soil fertility and polluting the water bodies of lying coastal Sierra Leone, especially the communities of Kroo Bay and Moa Wharf. There quality, population displacement, loss of property, reduction in groundwater resources, and reduced agricultural potential for coastal areas. Impacts of climate change on human health have also been documented (see for example, ref 1, ref2). Moreover, climate change is now recognized to have a significant impact on disaster risk reduction efforts and pose a considerable threat to efforts to meet the evolving needs of vulnerable communities include improving health delivery services, improving supply of safe drinking water and sanitation, increasing funding to the health sector, development of an early warning systems, strengthening meteorological and hydrological institutions, providing coastal infrastructure, improving sanitation, among other actions. Key priorities will be drawn from the iNAP, which key resource for implementing the adaptation actions outlined in this NDC.

The goals, actions, and plan proposed for adaptation in this section provide a country-driven and comprehensive approach to planning and implementation across multiple sectors and at scale. The approach sets out the adaptation outcomes the country is aiming to achieve, as well as how they will be achieved through iterative planning, public engagement, GESI mainstreaming, and other processes required for effective adaptation. These actions will be reviewed as the knowledge of climate risks and vulnerabilities across sectors and communities increases, as well as when the needs and capacities of different stakeholders evolve. The following analysis shows the progress made with the implementation of adaptation measures since 2015 (see table 8).

Table 8: Climate adaptation progress since 2015 warming and climate change.

All sectors  Most of the actions in the NAPA were developed into reported through the national communication.

Environment  Development of mined out area rehabilitation plan for four major mining companies (Sierra rutile,  1.2 million seedlings transplanted under the National Tree Planting Project out of a total of 5, million  100 ha of degraded mangrove sites restored and enhanced in 25 coastal wetland communities.

Environment  Implementing the youth in fisheries project in seven coastal districts, targeting 7,000 youths.

Implementing the West African regional Fisheries and disaster preparedness system.

Environment  Installed 8 weather stations across the country Early Warning System project.

Installed 8 Agromet stations through the climate smart agriculture project.

NaCSA rolling out the social safety net project to country.

Environment  Developed the Ecotourism Policy and Action Plan in 2015.

Coastal protection works through planting of assorted tree species by ecotourism communities, shift from houses;

Sargassum Seaweeds as an adaptation strategy.  Ecotourism enhanced through the construction of Eco-lodges and environmentally friendly facilities in demonstrate an operational business case.

Environment  National land policy developed, with provisions for are rooted in:

Actions to identify and assess risks, and managing those risks to minimize impact  An understanding that different communities, ecosystems, and sectors are affected differently by climate change and hence, require different plans, including soft, hard,  A consideration of future climate change impacts, as well as those already being  A phased approach to build flexibility and resilience in planning  Specific, measurable, achievable, results-oriented, and time-bound objectives that allow a continuous review of the effectiveness, efficiency, equity, and legitimacy of Table 9: Action plan for implementing adaptation actions Actions Sectors 1- Agriculture and food security; 2- rehabilitation.

Sector.

Objective 1:

Objective 1:

Objective1:

Objective:

Objective 2:

Objective:

Objective 1:

Goal:

The actions proposed in the preceding sections consider mitigation and adaptation complementary responses to climate change. The complementarity of actions is important because mitigation and adaptation responses interact with one another and reduce risks over different timescales. Through this approach, NDC implementation will contribute to nearly all the SDGs, as well as other local and international development indices (see section 7.5) . In general, the means of implementing the actions proposed above include sustainable financing, adequate and appropriate capacity, the adoption of new technologies, effective public and stakeholder engagement, GESI mainstreaming, policy influencing, and fit-for-purpose systems for governance. These factors are presented in the succeeding sections.

Finance is required for the implementation of the mitigation and adaptation actions proposed in this NDC. Various domestic and international vehicles will be explored for resource mobilisation, because international public financing sources like the Green Climate Fund (GCF) cannot provide all that is needed for a large-scale investment in addressing climate change. Accordingly, financing sources such as the private sector and domestic fiscal budgets will be explored, as described in Table 10 below.

Table 10: Potential vehicles and sources of climate financing Domestic budget Government of Sierra Leone Annual allocations Private sector Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean Fund (AFLAC) Africa Capitalization Fund, which invests in banks in Africa World Banks Community Development Carbon Fund (CDCF).

Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA), CCCFL China Climate Change Framework Loan (of EIB) CCPL Climate Change Program Loan (of AFD and JICA) European Investment Bank (EIB), European Union Emission FGEF French Global Environment Facility (of AFD) GEEREF Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund (advised by EIB) German International Climate Initiative From these different sources, USD 2,764,000,000 (Two Billion, Seven Hundred and Sixty Four Million US Dollars) could be mobilised to implement the actions proposed in this NDC. Compared to previous requests, this NDC requires enhanced international support in the form of finance, technology transfer, and technical assistance. As such, steps for improving access Financing Facility (NCFF) will be formed to set out an NDC Investment Plan (NIP), including a strategy for meeting the financing needs of the NDC. The CFF, housed within the National Climate Change Secretariat (NCCS) at the Environment Protection Agency (EPA) will build and create an enabling environment for private sector engagement. Further information on the governance of structures for resource mobilisation is described in section 7.8.

Table 11: Categorisation of proposed adaptation and mitigation actions into conditional and Improve mechanisms for multilevel climate governance and coordination. X 20 80 Increase Energy efficiency and access through the dissemination of clean Promote the mainstreaming of climate actions into processes within industries X 20 80 Improve and maintain Sierra Leones forests as a major carbon sink. X 90 10 Enhance integrated waste management system in the country X 80 20 Maintain the integrity of the marine and coastal environment X 70 30 Diversification of economic growth through strengthened transport sub- sector, particularly the infrastructure to contribute to the reduction of regional and global emissions of greenhouses and build a stable economy.

Adoption and application of climate-smart and conservation agriculture through best agricultural practices that enhance soil fertility and improve crop yield X 70 30 Management of rangelands and pastures by managing grazing systems and grazing intensity, fire management and pasture rehabilitation.

Integrated management of crops and Livestock management. Strategy X 60 40 Strengthen integration of climate change adaptation into the health Sector. X 70 30 Create enabling environment for the resilience of private sector investment, Integrate climate change adaptation into the mining/extractive sector X 70 30 Promote climate-smart agriculture and climate-resilient food security practices X 80 20 Improve research and knowledge management capacities to Support Climate-Smart Agriculture and resilient land management Improve institutional and functional capacities for integrated water management X 10 90 Enhance universal access to energy by promoting renewables and energy Mainstream considerations of Gender Equality and Social Inclusion into Develop local institutional capacity to support coastal resources management X 70 30 Management of coastal and fisheries resources X 80 20 Increase human (social) development through technology transfer and Provide information and improve knowledge on climate risks and Improve Natural Resources Management in critical biodiversity hotspots X 35 65 Improve the resilience of environmental value chains across the sector (including forestry, mining, tourism, and land management).

Mainstream climate change adaptation considerations into sectoral plans and Improve institutional and functional capacities for environmental governance X 30 70 Establish early warning systems to improve local understanding of risks X 85 15 Improve regulatory frameworks for disaster management X 10 90 Capacity building and technology transfer are vital conditions for the successful implementation of the NDC under the Paris Agreement. In Sierra Leone, capacity building and technology transfer are perceived in view of the shortfalls in past initiatives on capacity are institutional, technical, and financial capacity gaps and needs with respect to the implementation of the adaptation and mitigation actions. Capacity gaps that have persisted include challenges to data generation, collection and analysis; governance and coordination;

Table 12: Actions for capacity building and technology transfer Introducing irrigation technologies, including the development of micro-systems for drip Processing and conserving agricultural products X Researching and applying climate-ready crop varieties X Beach nourishment as a response to sea level rise X Education, training, and public awareness of climate risks X Promoting the use of biogas as a substitute for wood X Producing biofertilizer as a substitute for chemical fertilizers X Development and use of renewable energy technologies X Building the capacity of the private sector for energy efficiency initiatives X Strengthening disaster preparedness and early warning systems X Strengthening the capacity of health system institutions X Developing technical capacity to manufacture energy-efficient cook stoves X Introducing standards for energy-efficient infrastructure X Expanding sustainable forest management and reforestation efforts X Reducing deforestation, including through building capacity for fire control X Designing systems for increased and sustainable access to freshwater resources X Enhancing knowledge on surface and groundwater management X Developing a nationally appropriate mitigation action for the transport sector X Improving and expanding public transportation X Building capacity for waste collection, transportation, and treatment X Improving data generation, collection, and analysis X X This NDC will build upon strategies in the National Climate Communications Strategy, which seeks to:

Improve awareness and understanding of the Government of Sierra Leones climate change adaptation initiatives and the NAP process through effective communication,  Promote an inclusive and participatory approach to adapting to climate change so that the Government of Sierra Leone can unite under a common vision and speak with one voice on the issue of addressing climate change impacts  Generate support and political commitment among key decision-makers for the NAP process and for prioritizing, managing and resourcing efforts to address climate change  Persuade the general public and the private sector of the need for a significant and timely investment in climate change adaptation from both public and private sources  Encourage Sierra Leoneans to collectively embark on activities to strengthen the The strategy was developed as part of the NAP Global Networks second programme of support to Sierra Leone with the aim of providing short- and mid-term guidance on how the government can use communications strategically and effectively to support the NAP process.

It identifies a need for vertical integration, including by building political momentum at the subnational level; as well as strategic communications, including by enhancing strategic communications around climate change adaptation at the national and local levels. The strategy seeks to further emphasize the following aspects (EPA 2020):

What information needs to be disseminated and when  The key audience that the Government of Sierra Leone needs to address  The relevant changes in knowledge, opinions or behaviour that need to be implemented  The most effective messages and channels of communication to be used  The sharing of communications-related responsibilities by different government actors to foster better internal coordination.

The approach taken to public engagement is based on the following SWOT analyses:  Strengths, including that the climate change adaptation and mitigation information are readily available to the public; the government has several channels of communication at its disposal; the public is willing to change attitudes and behaviours if they receive the appropriate climate change education and communication; there is technical personnel with the capacity to implement climate change communication initiatives; and there is evidence of political will to support climate change adaptation and communication.

Weaknesses, including low public awareness about national climate change policies and legislation; inadequate access and usage of climate change data by decision makers; low budget allocation for climate change adaptation initiatives among MDAs; climate change issues are yet to form major parts of the governments plans and budgets.  Opportunities, including that there are funding opportunities to support capacity- building initiatives on climate change communication in Sierra Leone; and development partners are committed to supporting climate change-associated initiatives  Threats, including that most of the general public is still in denial about climate change; some politicians, religious and cultural leaders still miscomprehend facts about climate change; there is an excessive use of scientific terminology and technical information in communicating climate change; and there is limited positive change in behaviours, attitudes, perceptions and practices.

A plan for public engagement is presented in table 13 below.

Table 13: Plan for public engagement (adapted from EPA 2020) Target audience Tools and approaches Channels Information Primary:

Secondary:

The governance and coordination mechanism for the NDC will foster the empowerment of women and marginalised people by ensuring meaningful participation in NDC implementation activities. Activities that create an enabling environment for women, youth, children, and persons with disability have been proposed, which will help to institutionalize GESI-sensitive approaches delivered at the technical and operational levels. Overall, NDC actions will promote a supportive institutional and policy environment for mainstreaming gender equality and social inclusion; mainstream GESI dimensions into the thematic and cross-cutting components of the NDC; enhance the capacity of partners and stakeholders to give women and marginalised groups a voice in climate management decision-making; and secure rights by increasing access to climate services and other socio-economic opportunities. The strategy for GESI mainstreaming is aligned with the Gender Equality and Womens Empowerment Policy (GoSL 2020) and contributes to the implementation of the countrys vision for GESI in the Medium-Term National Development Plan (MTNDP).

The NDC is aligned with several existing national and international policies, strategies, and plans, including the Medium-Term National Development Plan, AU Vision 2023, and the Sustainable Development Goals (see table 14). Therefore, it contributes to various country- level and regional actions to address climate change as part of global efforts to reduce vulnerabilities and mitigate emissions in countries. For instance, the governance and coordination mechanism for the NDC will support the delivery of SDGs, especially those on strong, accountable, and inclusive institutions (SDG16), strengthening means of implementation (SDG17), and creating more equitable governance systems (SDG4).

Table 14: NDC alignment with and the MTNDP, AU vision 2063 and SDGs, climate governance and coordination.

7.6 Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification (MRV) NDC actions will be tracked to meet local and international reporting requirements, including reports to policy makers and the public to improve transparency and shape decisions to update climate actions. The MRV framework proposed here builds upon sector-based systems for climate monitoring and reporting, as well as national approaches to MRV, including outputs of the CBIT (Capacity Building Initiative for Transparency) project Building and Strengthening Sierra Leones National Capacity to Implement the Transparency Elements of the Paris Agreement, 2020-2023.

MRV actions will focus specifically on tracking mitigation (M), adaptation (A), and finance GHGs by reviewing both the national inventory and national communications. This will involve regular M&E actions to track the implementation of the mitigation component of the NDC to ensure actions are contributing to meeting targets set and providing lessons for future decision-making. In the case of adaptation, the goal is to track implementation and assess the effectiveness of actions, and as provide insights for updating NAPs. In terms of financing, MRV efforts will track climate finance flows for NDC implementation to improve transparency and determine if resource needs are being met.

Table 15: MRV Indicators for proposed NDC actions climate governance and coordination.

- Proportion of relevant sectors (water, forest, Sector.

Additional indicators relevant to resource mobilization:

- Total financing mobilized from international public entities - Total financing mobilized from the private sector NDC implementation will be overseen by the Ministry of the Environment with technical support provided by the Environment Protection Agency (EPA) and the Sierra Leone Meteorological Agency (SLMet). The process will be supported by different Ministries, Departments, and Agencies (MDAs). The governance and coordination will involve driving progress, engaging stakeholders within and outside of government, maintaining political will at all levels, and coordinating planning and decision-making processes. The existing mechanisms for NDC implementation, such as institutional structures prescribed by the NAP, NFCS, MTNDP, NCCP, CCS, and other plans, policies, and strategies, will be maintained, to foster shared action and ensure inclusive stakeholder engagement across diverse actors- national, subnational, municipal, public, private, civil society, and community. Specific agencies (like the Sierra Leone Meteorological Agency) will be assigned specialised roles in the process, building on existing policies and processes, climate-related or otherwise.

As noted earlier, The Sierra Leone Climate Finance Fund (SLCFF) will be formed to mobilize and track the flow of finances. The architecture will include a Board of Directors or Steering Committee operated under the EPA with the EPA Executive Chairperson as the Board Chair; members taken from key stakeholder institutions, including select MDAs, private agencies, plan will be drawn to guide the establishment and running of the fund. On another hand, Sector Leads will be identified for rolling-out MRV actions and ensuring effective coordination. The Sector Leads will be part of a Sector Working Group (SWG) responsible for planning and delivery, as well as coordination with various District Working Groups (DWGs) at the subnational level. These structures will mainstream climate priorities and actions into subnational development plans, budgets, and other efforts.

Table 16: NDC governance and coordination matrix Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, Public Private Partnerships Unit (Office of the Vice President), bilateral and multilateral EPA-SL Directorate of Science, Technology, and Innovation Public engagement Ministry of Information and Communications GESI mainstreaming Ministry of Gender and Childrens Affairs Policy influencing MoEnv Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Ministry of Energy, Ministry of Water Resources, Ministry of Trade and Industry, Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources, Ministry of Mines and Mineral Resources, National Protected Area Authority, National Minerals Agency, Forestry Division Statistics Sierra Leone, National M&E Directorate 1. Allan, T. 1990. Tropical Forestry Action Plans Inter-Agency Forestry Review. Sierra 2. Blinker, Linda (September 2006), Country Environment Profile (CEP) SIERRA 3. CSIRO.2010. Climate Change Science, How OzClim works, accessed 9 June 2011.

4. FAO. 2012. Environment and Climate Change in Sierra 5. Gabler et al, 2008. Impact of Climate Change on Livestock Production 6. Garnaut, 2011 Garnaut Climate Change Review, Update Papers, benefits-climate-change-action.html#_Toc283971069 7. GoSL, 2003. Biodiversity: Strategic Action Plan 8. GoSL, 2014. Energy Sector Strategy 2014-2017 9. GoSL 2017 Environment Protection Agency Strategic Plan; 2017-2021.

10. GoSL, 2017 Ministry of Energy: Energy Sector Strategy 2014-2017 13. Holper, P., (2002) Greenhouse: Questions and Answers, CSIRO Research. 14. IPCC (2007). Summary for Policymakers. Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.

15. IPCC (2006) Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. General 16. IPCC, (2010), Definition of terms used within DDC, Viewed 19 December 2010, 17. John R Porter. IPCC 2014. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 485-533. Food Security and 7 Food 18. Jones, R., Chiew, F., Boughton, W. and Zhang, L. (2006a) Estimating the sensitivity 19. Lebbie 2002)5,Mabey, Prince T., Wei Li, Abu J. Sundufu, and Akhtar H. Lashari. 2020. Environmental Impacts: Local Perspectives of Selected Mining Edge Communities in Sierra Leone. Sustainability 12 (14): 5525.

20. McSweeney, C., M. New, and G. Lizcano. 2010. UNDP Climate Change Country Profiles: SIerra Leone. UNDP.

21. Mnzava, E.M. (1992) Assistance for Forestry Planning Sierra Leone Forest Management.

22. Mitigation and Adaptation Potential of Sustainable Farming Systems. Food and ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/010/ai781e/ai781e00.pdf 23. Nakienovi N, Swart R (eds) (2000) Special Report on Emissions Scenarios. A Special Report of Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA).

24. Office of the Chief Minister GoSL. 2019. National Reforestation and Timber Governance Policy: Policy for the Establishment of a National Reforestation and Timber Governance Agency (NARTGA). Government of Sierra Leone 25. Rahmstorf S, Cazenave, A., Church, J.A., Hansen, J.E., Keeling, R.F., Parker, D.E.

26. Recent climate observations compared to projections, Science, 316, 5825, 709 27. Renewable Energy Policy of Sierra Leone May, 2016 28. S. Solomon, D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M. Tignor 29. Sierra Leone - Climate Change (globalsecurity.org) 30. Sierra Leone - Simple English Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 31. Sierra Leones First Biennial Update Report, 2021 32. Sierra Leone climate: average weather, temperature, precipitation, when to go 36. United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 2004. 37. UNFCCC (2004). Decision 17/CP.8: Guidelines for the preparation of the national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention.

