E N H A N C E D N A T I O N A L L Y D E T E R M I N E D C O N T R I B U T I O N R E P U B L I C O F I N D O N E S I A Indonesia submitted Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Secretariat prior to COP-21. Under Decision 1/CP. 21, Party who has submitted its INDC before joining the Paris Agreement shall be considered to have communicated its 1st NDC unless the Party decides otherwise. Indonesia decided to strengthen its INDC by enhancing clarity, transparency, and understanding both for national and international interests, and submitted to the UNFCCC Secretariat the NDC document prior to COP-22.

The NDC reflects the progression beyond the earlier pledge in INDC in terms of: (a) the national Business as Usual (BAU) scenario used  BAU of NDC is slightly lower than BAU of INDC (from 2.881 GtCO2-eq in INDC to 2.869 GtCO2-eq in NDC), and (b) clarity of sectoral BAU and emission reduction target allocation, and assumption used for BAU projection and target allocation. The NDC has set an ambitious mitigation target for forest and land use and energy sectors which account for about 97% of the total national commitment.

The Updated NDC submitted in 2021, reflects the progression beyond the existing NDC particularly in the following standpoints: 1. Enhanced ambition on adaptation as elaborated in the programs, strategies and actions to achieve economic, social and livelihood, and ecosystem and landscape resilience, as depicted in Annex 2.

2. Enhanced clarity on mitigation by adopting the Paris Agreement rule book (Katowice Package) on information to be provided in NDC, as well as updated policies which potentially contribute to additional achievement of NDC target.

3. National context that relates the existing condition, milestones along with national development for the period of 2020-2024, and indicative pathways towards long- term vision (Visi Indonesia 2045 and the Long-Term Strategy on Low Carbon and Climate Resilient Development 2050).

4. Translating the Paris Agreement Rule Book (Katowice Package) into Indonesias context with a view to enhance effectiveness and efficiency in implementing the agreement and in communicating its progress and achievement as part of the responsibility of the party to the agreement. This includes elaborated chapters on transparency framework at the national level (National Registry System as the backbone of transparency framework), and means of implementation (finance, technology development and transfer, and capacity building).

As mandated by Decision 1/CMA 3, Parties are requested to revisit and strengthen their NDC- 2030 target, to align with the Paris Agreement temperature goal by the end of 2022. Responding to this mandate, Indonesia submits Enhanced NDC to the UNFCCC Secretariat by 23 September 2022 with increased emission reduction target from 29% in First NDC and Updated NDC to 31.89% unconditionally and from 41% in the Updated NDC to 43.20% conditionally. This Enhanced NDC is the transition towards Indonesias Second NDC which will be aligned with the Long-Term Low Carbon and Climate Resilience Strategy (LTS-LCCR) 2050 with a vision to achieve net-zero emission by 2060 or sooner.

Annex 1. Assumptions used for projected BAU and emission reduction (unconditional/CM1 and conditional/CM2 reduction) for all sector categories (Energy, Waste, IPPU, Agriculture, and FOLU).

Annex 2. Key programs, Strategies, and Actions to achieve climate resilience targets (economic, social and livelihood, and ecosystem and landscape).

1.1 . GENERAL POLICIES Indonesia is a nascent yet stable democracy and the fourth most populous country in the world. Despite continuous, multi-decade economic growth, approximately 11% of Indonesias population is living below the poverty line in 2014. To lift people out of poverty, the Government of Indonesia (GOI) is promoting economic development projected to average at least 5% per year in order to reduce the poverty rate to below 4% by 2025. Indonesia also anticipates both opportunities and challenges with projected population growth of 0.74 percent from 2015 to 2045, as mandated by the Indonesian Constitution, inter alia, that every person shall have the right to enjoy a good and healthy environment. As climate change becomes a reality, Indonesia continues to seek a balance between its current and future development and poverty reduction priorities.

In 2015 the Government of Indonesia pledged to reduce emissions from 2020-2030 by 29% (unconditional) up to 41% (conditional) against the 2030 business as usual scenario, an increased unconditional commitment compared to 2010 pledge of 26%. In the first term of President Joko Widodo administration, priority actions within the national Nawa Cita (Nine Priority Agendas) framework were determined and implemented, which includes protecting Indonesias citizens, encouraging rural and regional development, improving the quality of life, and improving productivity and global competitiveness. These core missions are consistent with the national commitment towards a low carbon and climate-resilient development path, in which climate change adaptation and mitigation constitute an integrated and cross-cutting priority of the National Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMN).

In the second term of President Joko Widodo administration, the goal of achieving a prosperous Indonesia has been defined. The RPJMN 2020-2024 is directed to transform Indonesia to a high middle class income country with a fair and sustainable development through following seven agenda : (a) Enhancing economic resilience for quality growth, (b) Strengthening regional development to address inequality among regions, (c) Enhancing human resource quality and competitiveness, (d) Building nation values and character of citizens, (e) Advancing infrastructure to support economic development and provision of basic services, (f) Enhancing the environment and resilience to natural disaster and climate change impacts, and (g) Strengthening stability in politic, law, national security and defense and public service transformation.

Indonesia has taken significant steps in land use sector to reduce emissions by instituting a moratorium of new permits and improvement of governance of primary natural forests and peatlands and by reducing deforestation and forest degradation, restoring ecosystem functions, as well as sustainable management of forest. The efforts include social forestry through active participation of the sub national governments, private sector, small and medium enterprises, civil society organisations, local communities and adat communities (Indonesia: Masyarakat Hukum Adat), and women  in both the planning and implementation stages. A landscape-scale and ecosystem management approach, emphasising the role of sub-national jurisdictions, is seen as critical to ensure greater and more enduring benefits from these initiatives.

The strategic approach of Indonesias NDC is predicated on the following foundational principles: 1) Employing a landscape approach: Recognising that climate change adaptation and mitigation efforts are inherently multi-sectoral in nature, Indonesia takes an integrated, landscape-scale approach covering terrestrial, coastal and marine ecosystems. 2) Highlighting existing best practices: recognising significant strides in multi- stakeholder efforts in combating climate change, Indonesia intends to scale up the diversity of traditional wisdom as well as innovative climate change mitigation and adaptation efforts by the government, private sector, and communities.

3) Mainstreaming climate agenda into development planning: recognising the needs to integrate climate change into development and spatial planning and budgeting process, Indonesia includes key climate change indicators in formulating its development programs targets.

4) Promoting climate resilience in food, water and energy: recognising the importance of fulfilling the needs of a growing young population for food, water and energy, Indonesia will improve its management of natural resources to enhance climate resilience by protecting and restoring key terrestrial, coastal and marine ecosystems.

In line with the Paris Agreement, Indonesia respects, promotes and considers its obligation on human rights, the right to health, the right of adat communities (Indonesia: Masyarakat Hukum Adat), local communities, migrants, children, youth, elders, persons with different abilities, and people in vulnerable situations; as well as the right to development, including gender equality, empowerment of women and intergenerational equalities. Engagement of non-party stakeholders, such as local government, private sectors, and civil societies will continuously be enhanced.

Indonesias Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) outlines the countrys transition to a low carbon and climate resilience future. The NDC describes the enhanced actions and the necessary enabling environment during the 2015-2019 period that has laid the foundation for more ambitious goals beyond 2020, contributing to the concerted effort to prevent 2oC increase in global average temperature and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5oC above pre-industrial levels.

By 2030, Indonesia envisions achieving archipelagic climate resilience as a result of comprehensive mitigation and adaptation and disaster risk reduction strategies. Indonesia has set ambitious goals for sustainability related to production and consumption of food, water, and energy. These goals will be achieved by supporting empowerment and capacity building, improved provision of basic services in health and education, technological innovation, and sustainable natural resource management, in compliance with principles of good governance. Beyond 2030 NDC target, Indonesia has committed to progress towards the transformation to long-term low carbon and climate resilience development strategy.

Institutions, sub-national governments, private sectors, civil societies, and financial institutions (Party and Non-Party Stakeholders).

2. Capacity building to enhance capacity of institutions and human resources at all levels, covering all aspects of climate change, particularly on mitigation and adaptation actions, implementation of transparency framework, and climate finance.

3. Creating enabling environment to engage wider stakeholders in mitigation and adaptation as well as in resource mobilisation, through appropriate regulatory framework, policy and measures.

4. Developing framework and network for coordination and building synergy among sectors, regions and actors/stakeholders.

5. One GHGs-data policy to support the implementation of transparency framework at the national level.

6. Developing policies, planning and intervention program for NDC implementation, including integrating mitigation in five category sectors (forestry, energy, IPPU, waste, agriculture) and adaptation (sectoral and regions) into development planning, to secure financial support (public fund) and facilitate resource mobilisation (domestic sources and international supports).

7. Developing guidance for NDC implementation to facilitate Ministries and other governmental institutions, sub-national governments and other non-party stakeholders in implementing Program No. 6.

8. NDC implementation refers to implementation of policies, planning and intervention programs (Program No.6), taking into account guidance developed under Program No. 7. 9. Monitoring and review of NDC to track progress of NDC implementation, review of NDC and adjust the NDC whenever necessary. Inter-ministerial team has been established to monitor progress and achievement of NDC implementation.

As mandated by Article 4.19 of the Paris Agreement, Indonesia formulates a long-term low greenhouse gas emission development strategy (LTS) which defines pathways in achieving low emission development until 2050 and is expected to guide the implementation and development of the subsequent nationally determined contributions (NDCs). The Indonesias LTS proposes innovative pathways towards the common goal to imperatively take ambitious actions to address climate change challenges, not only through a deeper GHG emission reduction towards net-zero emissions but also through the element of climate resilience pathway, along with the commitment of NDC.

Successful mitigation actions will reduce adaptation cost and allow Indonesia to better deal with loss and damage associated with climate change impacts. Hence, the LTS will play a central role in aligning the climate goals and targets with national, sub- national and international objectives including sustainable development goals (SDGs), engaging non-party stakeholders, enhancing opportunities for innovation, and enabling communities to earn the benefits of early actions.

The LTS will strengthen the vision of One Hundred Years Indonesia (Visi Indonesia 2045) towards prosperous Indonesia based on its four following pillars: (a) human resource development and science and technology advancement, (b) sustainable economic development, (c) equitable development, and (d) strengthening national resilience and public sector governance. Visi Indonesia 2045 has ambitious target on poverty reduction, human resource development, economic and social transformation. Therefore, Indonesias LTS is designed by taking into consideration the need to balance between emission reduction and economic development, and putting emission reduction, economic growth, a fair opportunity and climate resilient development as an integral part of the LTS goal. Conducive environment for investment, structural reform to support growth, and well-designed climate policy as prerequisites for a successful LTS have been addressed during the development process of LTS.

Under the scenario compatible with 1.5 0C goals (LCCP), greenhouse gas emissions will peak in 2030 at 1.24 GtCO2-eq of CO2-eq and then decline and continue to decline to reach 0.54 GtCO2-eq in 2050. It is expected that net zero emissions (NZE) will be achieved by 2060 or sooner.

Indonesia considers the importance of just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs for an effective and inclusive transition to low greenhouse gas emission and climate resilient development. Creation of employment opportunities for this transition will be carried out in synergy with ongoing transition towards prosperous Indonesia. The following efforts will be the critical parts of the transition: a) addressing challenges faced by sectors, cities and regions in transitioning to low carbon development and in ensuring a decent future for workers affected by the transition.

On gender issues, Indonesia has an advanced policy relating to gender equality and gender balance. Mapping gender issues in climate change in all development sectors will be crucial in implementing the policy. Enhancing role of women in development and strengthening women's capacity and leadership in climate change have been initiated and will be continued as part of the NDC implementation and development of LTS.

According to Indonesias Second National Communication of 2010, national greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions were estimated to be 1.8 GtCO2-eq in 2005. This represents an increase of 0.4 GtCO2-eq compared to 2000. Most emissions (63%) are the result of land use change and peat and forest fires, with combustion of fossil fuels contributing approximately 19% of total emissions. Based on Indonesias First Biennial Update Report (BUR) submitted to UNFCCC in January 2016, national greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions was 1.453 GtCO2-eq in 2012 which represent an increase of 0.452 GtCO2-eq from 2000 emissions. The main contributing sectors were LUCF including peat fires (47.8%) and energy (34.9%). The 2nd BUR reported a slight increase in emission level to 1.457 GtCO2-eq in 2016, which was dominated by emissions from LUCF including peat fires (43.59%) and energy (36.91%), respectively. The 3rd BUR reported increase in emission level to 1.845 GtCO2-eq in 2019, which was dominated by emissions from LUCF including peat fires (50.13%) followed by energy (34.49%), waste (6.52%) and IPPU (3.15%).

Post 2020, Indonesia envisions a progression beyond its existing commitment to emission reductions. Based on the countrys emissions level assessment in Third National Communication (TNC), Indonesia has set unconditional reduction target of 29% and conditional reduction target up to 41% of the business as usual scenario by 2030. These targets in emission reduction are considered as an ambitious step, taking into consideration its development challenges in eradicating poverty, as well as creating a better quality of life for its citizens as stipulated by 1945 Indonesia Constitution. Indonesia will continue to intensify the efforts to reduce emissions, of which 97.2% comes from forest-and-land and energy sectors.

In forestry sector, Indonesia has set up an ambitious target by 2030 in peat lands restoration of 2 million ha and rehabilitation of degraded land of 12 million ha. Indonesia will continue to work on Article 5 of the Paris Agreement that sends clear political signal on the recognition of the roles of forest and REDD+, in which remains as an important component of the NDC target from land use sector. Existing COP decisions has provided sufficient guidance to implement and support REDD+ implementation. As policy approaches and positive incentives, REDD+ should be able to support the achievement of Indonesias emission reduction target in forestry sector.

As the guidance for both national stakeholders and international partners providing REDD+ supports, the National Strategy consists of substantive elements from historical background, vision and missions to be achieved, strategy pillars and directions for the strategy implementation. The strategy pillars which comprise of strengthening REDD+ architecture and institution, managing REDD+ implementation, paradigm shift, and stakeholder engagement and benefit sharing, are the basis for determining directions for the strategy implementation.

The First Forest Reference Emission Level (FREL) for REDD+ was submitted to the UNFCCC Secretariat in December 2015, covering deforestation and forest degradation and peat decomposition. The FREL was set at 0.568 GtCO2-eq yr.-1 (AGB), using reference period of 1990-2012 and is used as the benchmark against actual emission starting from 2013 to 2020. These figures should be used as benchmark for evaluating REDD+ performance during the implementation period (up to 2020).The 2nd FREL was submitted in January 2022 with significant improvements in a number of elements, including reference period, scope of activities, carbon pools, emission factor and method to calculate uncertainty. Currently the 2nd FREL is under assessment process by UNFCCC.

FOLU Net Sink 2030 target (-140 MtCO2 emission level) will be achieved through the following policy measures: reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, increasing carbon sequestration capacity of natural forests, increasing carbon sequestration of land systems, reducing emissions from fires and peat decomposition, and law enforcement In energy sector, Indonesia has embarked on a mixed energy use policy. Indonesia has also established the development of clean energy sources as a national policy directive. Collectively, these policies will eventually put Indonesia on the path to de- carbonisation. Government Regulation No. 79/2014 on National Energy Policy, set out the ambition to transform, by 2025 and 2050, the primary energy supply mix with shares as follows: a) new and renewable energy at least 23% in 2025 and at least 31% in 2050; b) oil should be less than 25% in 2025 and less than 20% in 2050; c) coal should be minimum 30% in 2025 and minimum 25% in 2050; and d) gas should be minimum 22% in 2025 and minimum 24% in 2050.

The Government also promulgated Presidential Regulation No. 22/2017 on National Energy Grand Plan which mandates the target of 23% New Renewable Energy (NRE) in national energy mix by 2025 and 1% reduction in energy intensity per year.

Moreover, the effort in achieving emission reduction target is also supported by the implementation of regulations on Electricity Supply Business Plan (Rencana Usaha Penyediaan Tenaga Listrik, RUPTL) that prioritizes development of NRE (Green RUPTL), implementation of minimum energy performance standards (MEPS) for appliances, as well as the development of NRE in Indonesia.

As the 14th largest economy, Indonesia is one of the pioneer countries for fossil fuel subsidy reform policy. It has succeeded in removing fossil fuel subsidies to create fiscal space for education, health, social assistance and infrastructure, including renewable energy projects and public transports.

Indonesia has stipulated a national mandatory biodiesel policy of B20 through Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources Regulation No.12 Year 2015 on Provision, Utilisation and Trading of Biofuels as Other Fuels), and enhance it to B30 in 2020  ten-years earlier than 1st NDC target. Another direct command from President Joko Widodo to reduce the imported oil as well as to enhance domestic oil production by constructing additional oil refineries, will be a new shift for Indonesia as part of national goals on Visi Indonesia 2045. Moving forward, Indonesia is developing green refineries to produce various drop-in green fuels from bio-resources and partly mixed with existing fuels in order to increase biofuel content and reduce fossil fuel consumption. The Government of Indonesia has launched aggressive biofuel program, targeting 100% utilisation of biodiesel B-40 in 2030.

As part of the transformation towards sustainable energy transition, Indonesia has put into effect the Presidential Decree No 55 Year 2019 on Acceleration of the Battery Electric Vehicle Program for Road Transportation. The Presidential Regulation mandated Ministry of Industry to issue the Minister of Industry Decree No. 27 Year 2020 on Specifications, Development of Roadmaps, and Provisions to Calculate the Domestic Component Standards for Domestic Motor Vehicles Battery Electric Vehicle (BEV), in which stated that based on the roadmap, 4-wheel BEV in 2030 will be 750,000 units, while 2-wheel BEV will be 2,450,000 units.

For waste management sector, the Government of Indonesia is committed to develop a comprehensive strategy to improve policy and institutional capacity at the local level, enhance management capacity of urban waste water, reduce landfill waste by promoting the Reduce, Reuse, Recycle approach, and the utilisation of waste and garbage into energy production. The Government of Indonesia is committed to further reduce emissions from the waste management sector by 2020 and beyond, through comprehensive and coherent policy development, institutional strengthening, improved financial and funding mechanisms, technology innovation, and socio-cultural approaches.

Indonesias current policy on municipal waste management has been constituted by Presidential Decree Number 97/2017 on National Policy and Strategy on Solid Waste Management, which promulgated its policies, strategies, programs, and waste reduction target by 2025, as well as under the Presidential Regulation Number 35/2018 on Acceleration of Construction of Thermal Generation Facilities for Converting Waste into Electricity Energy with Environmental Sound Technology.

The projected BAU and both unconditional and conditional emission reduction targets are depicted in Table 1 with more elaboration for each sector in Annex 1.

In general, the key programs, strategies and actions on adaptation in Annex 2 aim at: a) reducing drivers of vulnerability to climate change impacts, b) responding to climate change impacts and managing risks, c) enhancing capacity of communities and sustainability of ecosystem services, d) enhancing engagement of stakeholders at all levels in building climate resilience.

The key programs and strategy to achieve adaptation goals in NDC are elaborated into actions which contain a high national dimension, have strong linkages with international conventions/agreements, including Rio Conventions, which open opportunity for Indonesia to build synergy between the implementation of the Paris Agreement of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and these conventions/ agreements. Referring to Article 7 of the Paris Agreement, the Global Goal on Adaptation (GGA) of enhancing adaptive capacity, strengthening resilience, and reducing vulnerability to climate change, with a view to contributing to sustainable development and ensuring an adequate adaptation response in the context of the temperature goal. Indonesia has developed SIDIK (Vulnerability Index Data Information System) as a tool for adaptation planning processes. SIDIK helps integrate climate change adaptation into development planning so that it is oriented towards increasing adaptive capacity and resilience, and reducing vulnerability. SIDIK shows two of the three elements of the GGA, namely adaptive capacity and level of vulnerability. It is used as one of the considerations in strengthening climate resilience. SIDIK provides information on vulnerability based-on administrative areas as input in determining appropriate adaptation policies, programs and activities (adequate adaptation responses). Indonesia translates the mandate of the Paris Agreement and Glasgow Climate Pact related to non-party stakeholders engagement into the national context through joint adaptation mitigation program through the implementation of the Climate Village Programme (Program Kampung Iklim or ProKlim). In the adaptation context, ProKlim has been able to assess adaptation through three aspects consisting of determining adaptation needs, measuring adaptation implementation process, and assessing effectiveness of adaptation. With 3,270 locations of established ProKlim in 2021, Indonesia is targeting to achieve 20,000 ProKlim locations in 2024. ProKlim was launched in 2012 and has been transformed into a national movement since 2016. The program encourages and facilitate active participation of multi- stakeholders, collaboration and partnership among governments, local communities, local businesses, NGOs, private companies, academia and financial institutions to increase community resilience and reduce GHG emissions. Indonesia commitment under Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), Convention to Combat Land Degradation and Desertification (UNCCD), RAMSAR convention, and Sendai Framework on Disaster Risk Reduction (SFDRR), as well as the 2030 Agenda of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) were considered to have significant potential for synergy with NDC - adaptation. For example:

Indonesia in its 1st NDC committed to reduce unconditionally 29% of its greenhouse gasses emissions against the business as usual scenario by the year of 2030. The BAU scenario was projected approximately 2.869 GtCO2-eq in 2030 which was updated from the BAU scenario on the INDC along with energy policy development particularly in coal fired power plant.

The Enhanced NDC increases unconditional emission reduction target of 31.89%, compared to 29% in the 1st NDC. The commitment will be implemented through effective land use and spatial planning, sustainable forest management which include social forestry program, restoring functions of degraded ecosystems including wetland ecosystems, improved agriculture productivity, energy conservation and the promotion of clean and renewable energy sources, and improved waste management.

Indonesia can increase its contribution up to 43.20% reduction of emissions in 2030 conditionally, compared to 41% in the 1st NDC, subject to availability of international support for finance, technology transfer and development and capacity building.

Type Emission reduction relative to Business As Usual (BAU) baseline. Baseline BAU scenarios of emission projection started in 2010.

Coverage Nationwide with a landscape and ecosystem management approaches in both adaptation and mitigation efforts by building and strengthening sub-national jurisdictional capacity 4.1. QUANTIFIABLE INFORMATION ON THE REFERENCE POINT AND TIME FRAMES AND / OR PERIODS FOR IMPLEMENTATION The Government of Indonesia has demonstrated its strong commitment to institutional development by establishing the Directorate General of Climate Change, under the Ministry of Environment and Forestry. Established by Presidential Regulation No. 16 of 2015, the Directorate General serves as the National Focal Point for the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to effectively facilitate ongoing relevant programs and processes being implemented by variety of government sectors and stakeholders. Since climate change has local to national and international dimensions, coordination and synergy will continuously be enhanced among the Ministry of Environment and Forestry, National Development Planning Agency (BAPPENAS) and Ministry of Finance in the context of climate change, national development and finance, Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the context of climate change and international negotiation, and Ministry of Home Affairs in the context of NDC implementation by sub national.

In the preparation of the Enhanced NDC, the GOI has conducted consultations with various stakeholders representing Ministries and other government institutions, academia, scientists, private sector, and civil society organisations; these consultations have included workshops and consultations organised at both the national and provincial levels, as well as bilateral meetings with key sectors.

The preparation of the NDC has taken into account the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) particularly on taking urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts, promoting food security and sustainable agriculture, achieving gender equality, ensuring the availability and sustainable management of water, access to affordable, reliable, and renewable energy for all, sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, resilient infrastructure, sustainable consumption and production patterns, conservation and sustainable use of the oceans, seas and marine resources, and protecting, restoring and promoting sustainable forest management and sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, promoting land degradation neutrality, as well as protection conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity).

Metric Applied Global Warming Potential (GWP) on a 100-year timescale in accordance with the IPCCs 2nd Assessment Report.

Model for estimating emission:

Dashboard AFOLU for land-based sector; ExSS (Extended Snapshot) using GAMS (General Algebraic Modelling System) and CGE (Dynamic CGE) for energy sector;

Mitigation Action Road Map for Cement Industry (Ministry of Industry) for IPPU sector;

First Order Decay-FOD (IPCC-2006) and existing regulation for waste sector.

With the baseline and assumption used for projection and policy scenario 2020-2030, the projected BAU and emission reduction for both unconditional (CM1) and conditional (CM2) reduction are as in the Table 1 with more elaborated assumptions for each sector can be seen in the Annex 1.

TOTAL 1,334 2,869 1,953 1,632 915 1,240 31.89% 43.20% 3.9% 3.20% Notes: CM1= Counter Measure 1 (unconditional mitigation scenario) CM2= Counter Measure 2 (conditional mitigation scenario) * ) Including fugitive. **) Including emission from estate and timber plantations.

4. 4. A S S U M P T I O N S A N D M E T H O D O L O G I C A L A P P R O A C H E S M E T M E T H O D O L O G I C A L A P P R O A C H E S Indonesia GDP growth rate has slowed down between 2010-2015, from 6.2-6.5% per annum to only 4.0% (first quarter 2015). Indonesias population has increased at an average rate of 1.49% during the period of 2000-2010, posing challenges for Indonesia in fulfilling energy demand, ensuring food security, and fulfilling livelihood needs. At the same time, poverty alleviation remains a challenge for Indonesia, with 10.96% of the population living in poverty in 2014, and the unemployment rate at 5.9%.

The above data was used as a basis in setting up the Indonesias target for reducing greenhouse gas emission under the unconditional- and conditional-scenarios (CM1- and CM2-scenarios).

There has been an increase on average growth rate of GDP during period of 2015- 2019 of 5.03% compared to 4.0% at the first quarter 2015, with the highest growth rate of 5.17% in 2018 and the lowest one of 4.88% in 2015. The 2019 GDP growth rate was also high (5.02%) although slightly lower than the growth rate in 2018. However, the COVID-19 pandemic which has brought about global crisis not only on health, but also on social and economic aspects, has negatively affected Indonesias economy. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Indonesia has experienced economic contraction with GDP growth rate of minus 5.3% at the second quarter 2020. During COVID-19 pandemic, the anthropogenic activities were in general lower than that in previous years, resulting in lower GHG emission levels in 2020 and 2021. In the coming years Indonesia will recover its economic growth. It is projected that in the near term between 2022-2030, its economic growth will be around 5%-6%; for the longer term the growth will be slightly decrease to 5% in 2030-2050 and 4% in 2050-2060.

Despite current progress in development and challenges, particularly caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, Indonesia is committed to transform its current development pathway towards low carbon and climate resilience in a phased-approach. The pathway towards decarbonisation of the economy has been integrated into Indonesias long- term low greenhouse gas emission and climate resilient development strategy.

The Indonesias NDC will contributes towards achieving the objective of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change as set out in its Article 2 through its climate change related policies by reducing greenhouse gas emission and enhancing climate resilience which will lead to sustainable economic development.

Climate change policies will align with sustainable economic development through reduced GHGs emission and enhanced climate resilience. Sustainable economic development needs conducive environment for investment, fair international trade, and industrial-based economic growth. Climate change policies requires low carbon and climate resilient development, supported by domestic and international resources.

4.6. INDONESIAS NDC CONTRIBUTES TOWARDS ACHIEVING THE OBJECTIVE OF THE CONVENTION AS SET OUT IN ITS ARTICLE 2 Indonesia has worked on finding the peaking time of national GHGs emissions necessary to meet the national sustainable development objectives while contributing to the global efforts to fight against the dangerous impacts of climate change by limiting temperature increase to 2oC and pursuing the limitation to 1.5oC. Through low carbon scenario compatible with the Paris Agreement target (LCCP), Indonesia foresees to reach the peaking of GHGs emissions with net sink in forestry and land uses (FOLU) in 2030, and to progress towards net-zero emission by 2060 or sooner.

As part of the implementation of Article 13 of the Paris Agreement, Indonesia applies an Integrated National Transparency framework, through: (a) National Registry System (Id. Sistem Registry Nasional/SRN) for mitigation, adaptation and means of implementation both from national and international sources; (b) National GHGs Inventory System (SIGN-SMART); (c) MRV system for mitigation including REDD+, (d) Safeguards Information System for REDD+ (SIS-REDD+); and (e) Information Systems on Vulnerability (SIDIK) and joint adaptation and mitigation at the Village level (ProKlim). The National Registry System (SRN) was established in 2016 as a web-based system for managing data and information on mitigation, adaptation, carbon economic value and means of implementation (finance, capacity building, and technology transfer and development). Public access through website allows stakeholders to obtain data and information on mitigation, adaptation, and means of implementation registered in the system.

In general SRN has the following functions:

Indonesia recognizes the need to improve the National Registry System (NRS/SRN) over time to enable the system optimally functioning to support climate change actions, resource mobilisation and the implementation of carbon economic value. Hence, Indonesia will use domestic funding and mobilize international funding sources, including opportunities under capacity building initiatives for transparency framework mandated by Decision 1/CP. 21 and the Paris Agreement.

As part of implementation strategy of NDC mandated by Presidential Regulation No. 98 year 2021, Indonesia is pursuing One GHGs Data Policy. The SRN will play a strategic role in the implementation of this policy as well as other strategies. Therefore, SRN will be further enhanced, taking into account outcomes of the review of SRN design, experience and lessons drawn from operationalisation of SRN, and international development in transparency framework.

Article 3 of the Paris Agreement stated that as nationally determined contributions to the global response to climate change, all Parties are to undertake and communicate ambitious efforts as defined in Articles 4, 7, 9, 10, 11 and 13 with the view to achieving the purpose of this Agreement as set out in Article 2. The efforts of all Parties will represent a progression over time, while recognising the need to support developing country Parties for the effective implementation of this Agreement.

Article 9, 10 and 11 of the Paris Agreement specifically refers to Means of Implementation. The key elements of the Means of Implementation -- finance, technology development and transfer, and capacity building -- are integral part of the Agreement. To enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of means of implementation, finance, technology and capacity building should be coherently provided through cooperative and coordinated linkages among relevant entities.

Consistent with Article 9 of the Paris Agreement, developed country parties are requested to provide financial resources to assist mitigation and adaptation in developing countries, and taking the lead in mobilising climate finance from a variety of sources, instruments and channels.

Indonesias unconditional and conditional commitment in achieving quantified target of GHGs emission reduction reflects the need for domestic and international sources of finance.

National Development Planning Agency (BAPPENAS) reported that for the period of 2015 to 2019, Indonesia provides funding for the implementation of climate change actions and plans, including allocating a total of USD 55.01 billion. Indonesia will continue to set aside significant national funding for the implementation of mitigation and adaptation actions for the period of 2020-2030.

Indonesia also receives international support through multilateral channels (such as GEF, World Bank, GCF, Adaptation Fund, and other financial institutions) and bilateral channels (Norway, Germany, Japan, USA, and others). During the reporting period of 2015-2016, Indonesia recorded to have received support of USD 1,237.41million in the form of loan and grant through bilateral and multilateral channels.

Considerable challenge has been encountered in estimating investment needs for climate mitigation and adaptation. Budget tagging for climate change as the first attempt to address the challenge has been carried out since 2015. The first budget tagging focusing on mitigation was done to 2015 state budget, by clustering activities into two categories: first category includes activities which could deliver emission reduction and the second category covered supporting activities.

The Ministry of Finance recorded in its Climate Mitigation and Adaptation Budget Report (Laporan Anggaran Mitigasi dan Adaptasi Perubahan Iklim 2018-2020) that there has been an increase in amount of budget allocation for activities categorised as mitigation from IDR 146.8 trillion (~ USD 10.49 billion) in 2017 to IDR196.3 trillion (~ USD 14.02 billion) in 2018. On adaptation, the Ministry of Finance recorded USD 227.4 million budget allocation, based on budget tagging for adaptation in 2018. Results of the budget tagging has helped government in identifying activities in annual budget which can deliver mitigation and adaptation results. However, a lot of improvements need to be done to enable the budget tagging results to be used as the basis for estimating finance needs for NDC implementation.

Furthermore, Indonesia welcomes bilateral, regional and international cooperation in the NDC implementation as recognised under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, that facilitate and expedite technology development and transfer, payment for performance, technical cooperation, and access to financial resources to support Indonesias climate mitigation and adaptation efforts towards a climate resilient future.

Projection of needs as a basis for developing financing strategy for the whole period of NDC implementation remains challenging. For example, Indonesia communicated through its 2nd Biennial Update Report (2nd BUR - 2018) an initial estimated finance needs from 2018-2030 of about USD 247 billion. In 2019, Indonesia carried out another estimation of finance needs of about IDR 4,520 trillion (~ USD 322.86 billion) for the implementation of mitigation actions in the NDC roadmap. The later estimated finance needs covered only mitigation actions (actions which directly generate emission reduction, it has not included the costs for creating enabling environments). The 3rd BUR (2021) estimated financial needs for conditional target from 2018-2030 about USD 285 billion and for unconditional target about USD 281 billion.

Constrains has also been faced in estimating support needs, in particular in relation to methodological approach used to assess finance needs for mitigation and adaptation, data availability and reliability, and diverse perceptions of stakeholders on NDC financing.

Despite challenges faced in projecting finance needs for NDC implementation, Indonesia has developed a number of innovative green financing, which may contribute positively to NDC implementation, for example, green sukuk, green bond, and public- private partnership through SDGs-One Indonesia Platform.

In order to strengthen climate financing, Indonesia has established Indonesia Environmental Fund Management Agency (IEF/BPDLH). BPDLH is mandated to manage and mobilize finance for environment and allowed to mobilize climate finance from various sources both national and international sources, private and public sources, bilateral and multilateral channels. Since its establishment in October 2019, BPDLH has managed reforestation fund from domestic sources about/of USD 143.86 million (forest levy paid by private sectors) and initiated REDD+ result-based payment of USD 103 million and energy sector of USD 1.76 million from international sources.

Indonesia acknowledges the central role of science, innovation, and technology in tackling climate change. Together with human resource development, science and technology advancement has been set as one of the four pillars of Visi Indonesia 2045. Climate technology development will be aligned with this vision and guided by Law on National System for Science and Technology (Law No. 11/2019).

Article 10 of the Paris Agreement recognizes the importance of technology for the implementation of mitigation and adaptation, and the needs of developing country for support, including for strengthening cooperation on technology development and transfer at different stages of the technology cycle.

Needs Assessment is an integral part of technology development and transfer. Indonesia embarked on First Technology Needs Assessment (TNA) in 2010 focusing on mitigation, then followed by the 2nd TNA in 2012 covering both mitigation and adaptation. The outcomes of ongoing TNA that has been carried out since 2019 will provide guidance for technology development and transfer to support NDC implementation.

The role of endogenous technology, local wisdom and best practices will continue to be strengthened. Indonesia also calls for international support and collaboration in research, development and demonstration (RD & D) of innovative technologies. International support on technology development and transfer will also be directed to address possible risks of the selected technology and constraints in the implementation process of technology transfer and collaboration.

Capacity building on climate change has been carried out for many years by government institutions, international organisations, NGOs, and private sectors. Nevertheless, collecting data and information on the areas of capacity building and its progress, experiences and lessons remains challenging, and that gaps and overlaps in capacity building activities have been unavoidable. The main challenges in capacity building, include: a) diversity in regional circumstances, progress in development, culture and literacy which need considerable process both in tailoring program and approach in implementation, b) Insufficient coordination among capacity building programs and activities, including the ones with international supports.

Capacity building program on climate change will be aligned with Indonesia vision on education which will focus on: (a) human resources development to build strong character, (b) regulatory reform to increase effectiveness and efficiency of capacity building programs and activities, (c) Increase investment in human resource development, including revitalisation of vocational education, (d) creation of employment and business opportunities, and (e) use of technology to increase efficiency in capacity building.

Capacity building program and activities on climate change is one among a number of approaches to address just transition and decent work issues in mitigation and adaptation, including gender and inter-generational needs as well as the needs of vulnerable groups. A preliminary assessment on capacity building needs was done in 2018-2019 as part of national capacity building and technology needs assessment (CBTNA), which can be enhanced as part of the capacity building road map.

Two interrelated instruments of capacity building will be used to support NDC implementation. The first instrument (General Instrument) will focus on integrating climate change into the national system on education, training, and other forms of capacity building, while the second instrument (Technical Instrument) will focus on capacity building programs for various actors in mitigation and adaptation.

The General Instrument covers, inter alia, the following efforts: a) Increase public awareness through outreach and campaign. b) Improve provision of information accessible for public with different level of knowledge on climate change. c) Enhance stakeholder engagement in climate policy formulation and actions. d) Enhance collaboration and network at the local, national and international levels.

The Technical Instrument specifically deals with capacity building programs for both institutions carrying out capacity building on climate change and actors (state and non- state) implementing climate change mitigation and adaptation. Depending on the target groups of capacity building, the program aims at capacity enhancement at least in planning and implementation of mitigation and adaptation including climate financing strategy, access to finance and technology, GHGs inventory, and MRV of actions and supports or in a broader scope for the implementation of the transparency framework mandated by Article 13 of the Paris Agreement.

Article 11 of the Paris Agreement encourages collaboration in capacity enhancement of developing country in implementing the agreement, with developed country parties provides support for the capacity building. The Paris Agreement and its relevant decisions also emphasize the needs of developing country for capacity building in implementing transparency framework. Indonesia will use domestic resources and mobilize international support to enhance its capacity to support NDC implementation, including for further development of national system on transparency framework and to progress with transformational changes in capacity building.

Indonesia has received support to strengthen institutional capacity to comply with transparency requirement of the Paris Agreement. The support covers 3 following areas: institutional capacity strengthening for climate transparency, development of robust systems for GHG inventory, MRV of GHG emission reduction, and strengthened NDC implementation and tracking progress.

The NDC reflects the most recent data and information, analysis, and scenario for possible future, by the Government of Indonesia. As a developing country, Indonesia will likely experience dynamic changes due to national and global economic changes. In this regard, the NDC will be reviewed and adjusted, as necessary, considering national circumstances, capacity and capability, and the provision under the Paris Agreement.

Assumptions used for projected BAU and emission reduction (unconditional/CM1 and conditional/CM2 reduction) Similar actions with CM1 but with further enhanced/ expanded mitigation in energy efficiency measures - Electric Vehicle (EV) no EV Program 15,197,000 units - Street lighting with efficient lamp no EE program for street 4,050,000 KL Similar actions with CM1, with further enhanced/ expanded mitigation through use of low carbon emitting fuels - Kerosene to LPG Conversion Kerosene Use in 2010 8,247,000 Ton - CNG for public transport No additional CNG for Notes: 1. Energy Efficiency:

Energy efficiency measures to be carried out by all energy consuming sectors (industry, commercial, transport, residential) through improvement of device efficiency and energy system efficiency including implementation of electric vehicle and its ecosystem.

2. Implementation of clean coal technologies in power plants: Clean coal technologies such as supercritical and ultra-supercritical coal-fired power plants and other technologies that will be implemented after they are commercially available.

3. Renewable energy in electricity production: Renewable power plants to be developed includes geothermal, hydropower, solar PV, wind turbine, biomass, and biofuel. Solar rooftop in residential, commercial and industry sectors 4. Implementation of biofuel in transportation sector: The main feedstock for the biofuel production will be palm oil.

5. Additional gas distribution lines (Gas pipeline for residential and commercial sectors): Construction of additional natural gas pipeline is intended to substitute the use of kerosene for cooking in residential and commercial sectors.

6. Compressed Natural Gas consumption (CNG fuelling station): CNG consumption is intended to increase gas consumption in transportation sector 1. The use of low- emission crops.

No mitigation actions.

Total use of land for low emission crops up to 902,000 hectares in 2030*.

Total use of land for low emission crops up to 932,000 hectares in 2030*.

2. Implementation of water-efficient concept in water management.

No mitigation actions.

Implementation of water efficiency up to 2,583,000 hectares in 2030*.

Implementation of water efficiency up to 3,376,000 hectares in 2030*.

4. Manure management for biogas.

No mitigation actions.

Manure used for biogas will come from 166,000 cattle in 2030***.

5. Feed supplement for cattle.

No mitigation actions.

Note: * The use of best available technology will increase crop productivity and lead to the decrease of land use change for agricultural purposes. ** The application of synthetic nitrogen fertilizer will reduce by 0.15 ton for every one-ton organic fertilizer *** With assumption that governments subsidy will continue taking into consideration its high cost of investment). **** For CM1, it is about 27.4% of big ruminant population and 20% of small ruminant population and for CM2 it is about 37.4% of big ruminant population and 20% of small ruminant population. A. The index for paddy in and outside Java in 2030 will reach 2.2 and 1.7 respectively. It is assumed that most of paddy fields outside Java Island has been facilitated with irrigation system, while in Java most of irrigation system is working optimally (currently only 60-70% working optimally).

B. Assumption used for crop index: for seasonal crop, the cropping Intensity or crop index is a ratio between the area of harvesting and the area of crop planted. Hence, the IP is 2 when the areas biannual planting cycle. For perennial crop, the crop index refers to crop fraction that harvestable (under productive ages).

C. Assumption used for population/GDP and livestock: all projection scenarios for GDP employ the same livestock population. The set target for self-supporting meat is difficult to reach, and even the demand for meat would not be easily met. The livestock population growth follows historical data, which is lower than the rate of the meat demands.

A. Deforestation rate - Deforestation rate under BAU scenario for 2013-2020 is in line with the 1st FREL for REDD+, which is about 0.920 million ha/year, and consist of planned and unplanned deforestation. The rate for planned deforestation was calculated under existing development scenario.

- For both CM1 and CM2 scenarios, it is assumed that the rate of unplanned deforestation is low and the total of planned and unplanned deforestation would not exceed 0.450 million ha.

- Rate of deforestation for BAU 2021-2030 assumed to be 0.820 million ha/year, with scenario of CM1 comes into 0.359 and 0.175 million ha for CM2, respectively.

Forest Degradation Avoiding degradation of natural forest through controlling the illegal logging and increasing the production of timber plantation by accelerating the establishment of timber plantation and productivity.

Assumption for wood production: 1. Some literatures recorded that the rate of wood extraction from sustainable natural forest ranges from 20 to 35 m3/ha. This work took an assumption of 50 m3/ha for wood extraction in 2010 (the difference between literature and assumption taken is from illegal logging. Rate of sustainable extraction is assumed to be 30 m3/ha 2. Target for wood production from natural forest under CM1 and CM2 scenarios follow Long-Term National Forestry Planning (Rencana Kehutanan Tingkat Nasional/RKTN) (MoF, 2011), while the BAU is higher, using data from the Association for Indonesian Forest Concessionaire (APHI).

3. The rate for establishing industrial forest plantation under BAU follows the historical data, with the percentage of feasible areas for planting is about 63% (Assumption from APHI, 2007) 4. It is assumed that all forests cleared would leave zero waste, and all woods from these areas would be useable.

5. Utilisation of wood from oil palm and rubber trees at the end of its cycle is at medium rate or about a half of the total production.

Assumption for annual growth rate of natural forest: 1. Annual growth rate of plants in ton C/ha/year for natural forest was calculated based on the diameter growth in m3/ha/year with conversion factor of: a. Biomass Expansion Factor (BEF): 1.4 b. Wood density for natural forest: 0.7 t/m3 2. The estimated annual growth rate of natural forest based on the above assumption is 0.3 tC/ha/year to 0.33, representing the BAU rate. Under the CM1 and CM2, the rate is increased to 0.52 tC/ha/year and 0.98 tC/ha respectively.

3. The estimated growth rate for natural forest is lower than other published articles and also IPCC default ranged from 1 tC/ha/year and 3.5 tC/ha/year for logged forest >20 years and <20 years respectively. By adjusting or increasing the growth rate of natural forest through enrichment planting, capacity of Indonesian forest in sequestering carbon will increase significantly, thereby increasing emission reduction.

1. Increasing carbon sequestration in CM1 and CM2 from the BAU is conducted by increasing land rehabilitation program (afforestation and reforestation) and accelerating the establishment of timber plantation in unproductive lands (about 11.5 million ha in total) 2. The annual planting rate of timber plantation in CM1 and CM2 will reach 320 thousand ha per year (in total 6.4 million ha by 2030) 3. The annual planting rate for land rehabilitation will reach 280 thousand hectare per year (in total 5.6 million ha by 2030) Assumption for growth rate of timber plantation: 1. The rate of Industrial Plantation Forest (HTI) in ton C/ha/year was calculated based on data of measurable wood production volume in m3/ha, with BAU, CM1 and CM 2 in 2010 about 120 m3/ha and has been increased respectively to 134, 140 and 144 m3/ha in 2030 with the role of technology intervention. The intensification is in every 10 year and correction factors are as follows:

2. Rotation of six years and survival rate of more than 85%. C. Peat water management Improvement of water management in peatland, i.e. by increasing water level up to 50 cm from the surface will reduce the decomposition of the peatland, The implementation of improved water management are in palm oil and timber plantation. It is targeted that in 2030 its implementation in palm oil plantation under CM1 and CM2 will reach 892,000 ha respectively while in timber plantation it will reach 329,000 ha and 548,000 ha respectively.

Reducing emission from degraded peatland are carried out through rewetting and revegetation (peatland restoration). Under the BAU, it is assumed no restoration activities. Under CM1 and CM2, peat restoration will reach 2 million ha by 2030.

Assumption for peatland restoration Rate of peat decomposition is assumed to be zero in the restored peatland as the peat condition will be the same as/closed to natural condition. Successful rate of peatland restoration is assumed to be 90% for both CM1 and CM2.

The implementation of Landfill Gas (LFG) recovery which is supported with the rehabilitation of an open dumping TPA into a sanitary landfill and equipped with methane gas utilisation. 1.5 million ton CO2-eq reduction comes from LFG utilisation for >5,900 household and >45 MW LFG power.

The application of Landfill Gas (LFG) recovery which is supported with the rehabilitation of an open dumping TPA into a sanitary landfill and equipped with methane gas utilisation. 1.5 million ton CO2-eq reduction comes from LFG utilisation for >5,900 household and >45 MW LFG power.

2. Waste utilisation by composting and 3R (paper).

Treatment of waste by composting 3.7 million ton MSW and 3R paper to reuse/recycle paper up to 3.7 million ton. The facilities include: - Waste bank 762 unit - TPST 2857 unit (1469 Treatment of waste by composting 3.7 million ton MSW and 3R paper to reuse/recycle paper up to 3.7 million ton. The facilities include: - Waste bank 762 unit - TPST 2857 unit (1469 unit Utilisation of waste by converting to energy through RDF (in industry) or as renewable energy source in PLTSa; The PLTSa/RDF facilities is to treat 4.6 million ton MSW to avoid 1.9 million ton CO2-eq Utilisation of waste by converting to energy through RDF (in industry) or as renewable energy source in PLTSa; The PLTSa/RDF facilities is to treat 4.6 million ton MSW to avoid 1.9 million ton CO2-eq 4. Utilisation of waste to switch from landfill disposal to zero landfill disposal in 2060 Utilisation of waste is further enhanced with additional waste-to-energy or MSW recovery & utilisation facilities that treat 10,2 million ton MSW in 2030 to avoid 6.2 million ton CO2-eq Utilisation of waste is further enhanced with additional waste-to-energy or MSW recovery & utilisation facilities that treat 10,2 million ton MSW in 2030 to avoid 6.2 million ton CO2-eq Management of domestic liquid waste.

No mitigation actions.

Centralised / Integrated IPAL (city /communal/region scale) operated using aerobic system IPLT to treat sludge removal from septic system Biodigester and utilisation of biogas Centralised / Integrated IPAL (city /communal/region scale) operated using aerobic system IPLT to treat sludge removal from septic system Biodigester and utilisation of biogas Management of industrial waste.

No mitigation actions.

Utilisation of WWTP sludge and industrial solid waste through composting, reuse as raw material, use as energy, etc Utilisation of WWTP sludge and industrial solid waste through composting, reuse as raw material, use as energy, etc Wastewater treatment in palm oil, pulp & paper, fruits/vegetables & juices processing, and other industries: to implement methane capture & utilisation (biogas).

Wastewater treatment in palm oil, pulp & paper, fruits/vegetables & juices processing, and other industries: to implement methane capture & utilisation (biogas).

The previous target of 3 million ton CO2-eq is enhanced up to 26 million ton CO2-eq (equivalent to 1.2 million ton CH4 recovery) The previous target of 18 million ton CO2-eq is enhanced up to 28 million ton CO2-eq (equivalent to 1.3 million ton CH4 recovery) Increase blended cement by increasing the portion of alternative material for reducing clinker to cement ratio1 Projects for ammonia plant revitalisation to reduce natural gas consumption intensity no renewal or plant improvement (specific natural gas consumption 45 GJ/ton NH3) Construction of 3 new plants2 to replace old plants (specific natural gas consumption decreases from 45 to 40 GJ/ton NH3 in 2030) Further plant improvement, with specific natural gas consumption 35 GJ/ton NH3 in 2030 Maintain improved plants operation (automation of feeding system / hardware improvement from CWPB to bar-brake tech). GHG emissions reduction target is 0.1 Mton CO2-eq 4 Nitric acids industry no mitigation for N2O and continue using existing technology used since 2010 (with EF 10-19 Kg N2O per ton HNO3) Technology improvement (with EF 8 - 9 Kg N2O/ton HNO3) and installation non-selective catalyst reduction (NSCR) for N2O destruction (EF 2.5 Kg N2O/ton HNO3). GHG emissions reduction target is 0.1 Mton CO2-eq) Additional Installation of catalyst for N2O destruction. GHG emissions reduction target is 0.2 Mton CO2-eq) 5 Iron and Steel Industry no mitigation Improvement of smelter processes and scrap utilisation. Both will result in low GHG emissions intensity. The GHG emissions reduction target is 0.6 Mton CO2-eq) Further mitigation activities in process improvement of smelter and scrap utilisation. Both will result in further GHG emissions reduction. The GHG emissions reduction target is 0.9 Mton CO2-eq) Notes : 1. Green Industry Standard for Cement Industry require industry to reach clinker to cement ratio of 65% 2. The replacement of three old plants with the new ones had been carried out from 2015 to 2020. It should be noted that current world BPT (best practice technology) has natural gas consumption rate of 32 GJ/ton NH3 while the European best available technology (BAT) has 31.8 GJ/ton NH3, the world BAT has 28 GJ/ton NH3 (IEA, 2015), some of ammonia plants in Indonesia have 33-35 GJ/ton NH3 3. Computerisation process for automatic feeding system to reduce PFC and CO2 emissions losses through system software and hardware improvements and incorporating new algorithms in the control system that can reduce AE frequency, duration, and over voltage.

ENERGY SECTOR o National Energy Policy (KEN) 2014, o Electricity Supply Business Plan (RUPTL) 2016-2025, o National Energy Plan (RUEN) 2016.

AFOLU SECTOR o RKTN (Rencana Kehutanan Tingkat Nasional 2011-2030/Long-Term National Forestry Plan 2011-2030), o Industri Minyak Sawit Indonesia Menuju 100 Tahun NKRI/Indonesian Oil Palm Industry toward 100 year (GAPKI), o The Roadmap of Indonesias Forest Business Association (APHI) 2050, o Strategic Plan for Plantation/estate crops (including scenario for livestock), o Introduction Study on RPJMN 2015-2019 (BAPPENAS, 2013).

WASTE SECTOR o Act No. 18/2008 regarding Solid Waste Management, o Government Regulation No. 81/2012 regarding Management of Domestic Solid Waste.

ADAPTATION Key programs, Strategies, and Actions to achieve climate resilience targets Economic Resilience Climate change presents significant risks for Indonesias natural resources that will in turn affect the production and distribution of food, water and energy. As the population grows, there will be increasing pressures on Indonesias already limited resources. As a response, Indonesia plans to transform to low carbon economy and build resilience into its food, water and energy systems through the following key programs, strategies, and actions:

Mainstreaming / integrating climate change adaptation into agricultural sector, especially for strategic commodities.

Identification, development and implementation of best practices for farmers economic empowerment.

Enhancing management and provision of ecosystem services in agricultural sector.

Development of financing scheme for agriculture.

Development and implementation of climate adaptive technologies for sustainable production of agricultural crops and plantations.

Improve agricultural crops protection from pests and diseases.

R & D to produce high quality (genetically improved) seeds and cultural techniques to increase productivity.

Improved water management systems for increasing resilience to climate change.

Enhancing synergy across sectors and regions in watershed management.

Implementation of integrated upstream and downstream approach in forest rehabilitation and restoration, watershed management planning, and protection of terrestrial water resources.

Creating enabling environment for integrating of Natural Disaster Risk Management into business models and practices services in watershed management.

Identification, development and implementation of best practices in watershed management.

Mainstreaming/I ntegrating climate change adaptation in forest management to support mitigation actions and enhancement of economic resilience of communities living in/surrounding forests.

Sustainable utilisation of non-wood products by local and adat communities.

Identification, development and implementation of best practices and local wisdom in utilisation of natural forest resources.

Avoiding conversion of productive lands for other uses.

Integrated rehabilitation of degraded land and soil and water conservation.

Facilitate, oversight, enforcement and compliance to spatial plan.

Identification, development and implementation of best practices in land utilisation and management.

Integrated program on rehabilitation of degraded land and development of biomass energy  Rehabilitation of degraded land with species suitable for energy.

R & D to support sustainable biomass energy plantations and the bio-energy industries.

Enhance awareness of all stakeholders on the adaptation benefits of mitigation through improved energy efficiency and consumption patterns  Energy efficiency campaign.

Social and livelihood resilience Climate change also affects the day-to-day lives of all Indonesians, but most severely Indonesias most vulnerable populations. Climate change-induced natural disasters will impact a greater number of people living below the poverty line, preventing asset accumulation. Rising food, water and energy prices, which often follow drought, floods, and other disasters, will drive the poor further into poverty. Socio-economic disparity will potentially contribute to political instability in regions most affected by climate change. To prevent further disparity, Indonesia plans to build social and livelihood resilience through the following key programs, strategies, and actions:

1. Enhancement of adaptive capacity.

Reducing vulnerability through improved capacity on social- economy and livelihood.

Development of Early Warning System (EWS).

Disaster Potential synergy with implemen tation of SFDRR ?

Capacity enhancement for all stakeholders in responding EWS.

Responding to climate change impacts and managing risks including health.

Addressing drivers of vulnerability to climate change impacts.

Enhance stakeholder participation at all levels in building climate resilience, including in health protection and waste management 2. Development of community capacity and participation in local planning processes, to secure access to key natural resources;  Enhancing community capacity in natural resource management as a source of income, including capacity in risk management and sustainable utilisation of natural resources.

Awareness campaign, education and training.

Facilitate and oversight to ensure community interests, including gender, are accommodated in development plan.

3. Ramping up disaster preparedness programs for natural disaster risk reduction;

Increase effectiveness of natural disaster preparedness and post disaster recovery program.

Development and maintenance of natural disaster control infrastructures.

Revitalisation of climate related natural disaster control infrastructures based on climate change analysis.

4. Identification of highly vulnerable areas in local spatial and land use planning efforts.

Development and utilisation of information system and data provision on vulnerability, risks, and impacts of climate change.

Strengthening Information System on vulnerability index (Id. Sistem Informasi Data Indeks Kerentanan/ SIDIK)  Integration SIDIK with other related systems regarding vulnerability , risk and impacts of climate change 5. Improvement of human settlements, provision of basic services, and climate resilient infrastructure development.

Mainstreaming adaptation into spatial planning and strengthening compliance in the implementation of spatial plan.

Climate awareness campaign, standard enforcement and oversight in human settlement development, including building and environmental health.

Improve water resource management including soil water, measures to deal with disaster emergency.

6. Conflict prevention and resolution.

Strengthening coordination and communication in policy formulation and implementation.

Implementation of complain and redress mechanisms.

As an archipelagic country with high biodiversity, Indonesias highly diverse ecosystems and landscapes provide various environmental services such as watershed protection, carbon sequestration and conservation, and disaster risk reduction. In order to build climate resilience, Indonesia protects and sustain these environmental services by taking an integrated, landscape-based approach in managing its terrestrial, coastal and marine ecosystems through the following key programs, strategies, and actions:

1. Social forestry  Enhance engagement of local and adat communities in social forestry development process.

Awareness campaign on the important role of forest and forest areas in ecosystem resilience.

Mainstreaming adaptation into policies and programs on coastal zone and ocean.

Implementation of ecosystem-based adaptation in coastal zone development.

Implementation of integrated management of mangrove ecosystem.

Enhance coastal zone and ocean pollution control, including marine litter and plastic debris.

Potential synergy with implementation of Ramsar Convention, CBD, SFDRR, and UNCCD  Restoration of degraded coastal zone as essential ecosystem.

Improve livelihood of communities living in or depending on coastal areas.

Enhance ecosystem, species and genetic conservation.

Development and implementation of in situ and ex situ conservation.

Prevention and eradication of invasive alien species.

Protection of existing and development of new marine protected areas.

Enhance conservation education, including engaging adat communities for indigenous knowledge and local wisdom.

Potential synergy with implementation of Ramsar Convention, CBD, SFDRR, and UNCCD  Developing climate resilient watershed ecosystem management.

Improve watershed management planning by taking into account climate vulnerability, risks and impacts.

Developing policy instruments and tools to assess climate vulnerability, risks, and impacts to national priority watersheds.

Potential synergy with implementation of Ramsar Convention, CBD, SFDRR, and UNCCD 1. Climate resilient cities.

Promote development of climate proof cities.

Awareness campaign on the importance of integrating climate vulnerability, risks and impacts in city planning and development.

Revitalisation of city infrastructure to increase adaptive capacity and resilience to climate change impacts.

