Submitted to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate The Kingdom of Eswatini - Updated Nationally Determined Contributions The Government of Eswatini submitted its Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 2015 and ratified the Paris Agreement on 21st September 2016. Post enforcement of the Paris Agreement in November 2016, Eswatinis INDC came to be known as its first NDC. Eswatini is not a major contributor to the global Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions. Although the impacts of climate change are largely linked to the Eswatini presents its enhanced NDC, acknowledging that despite our contribution to climate change emissions being miniscule, the country is committed to climate action. The country intends to communicate that climate resilient, sustainable, and equitable development are its priorities.

The enhanced NDC of Eswatini comes at an opportune moment as the country is developing a new National Development Plan (NDP), National Adaptation Plan (NAP), Adaptation Communication and revising its National Development Strategy (NDS). The revision of NDC allowed the country to take the first NDCs submitted to the UNFCCC by the parties suggests that though ambitious, the global below 2oC. As per the Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C released by Intergovernmental Panel impacts on the sea level rise, biodiversity and increase frequency and intensity of extreme weather events1. Furthermore, since the submission of NDC in 2015, there has been considerable improvements and progress in technologies, policies, partnerships, data, and stakeholder engagement realities and progress made by the country to revise its NDC targets and roadmaps so as to ensure greater alignment with the objectives of the Paris Agreement. Eswatinis enhanced NDC communicates accompanying information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding of NDCs as per the economy, has prioritised some sectors and measures as detailed below.

The enhanced and more ambitious NDC of Eswatini represents a progression beyond the 2015 NDC by adopting an economy wide GHG emissions reduction target of 5% by 2030 compared to the baseline scenario3 and help achieve a low carbon and climate resilient development. This economy wide emission reduction can increase to 14% with external financing and this translates to 1.04 million tonnes fewer GHG emissions in 2030 compared to a baseline scenario.

Eswatini has achieved significant progress in overall socio-economic development which is visible through economic growth, improvements in health, educational outcomes, greater access to energy, and, improvement in water supply, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) including associated infrastructure. However, climate change impacts felt by communities and ecosystems are reversing the development cost of adaptation to climate change now can prove to contribute towards the outright avoidance of scenario showing the change in GHG emissions between 2018 and 2030 disaster relief and response.

Sector wise key adaptation contributions of Eswatini to the Paris Agreement 1. Increase the contribution of agriculture to economic development to support both food security and income generation through:

Converting flood irrigation systems to water efficient systems and adopt water saving practices to increase water availability, equity and security  Supporting development of in-farm water harvesting (including small earth dams) and move to more efficient technologies for intensive farming methods to improve food  Facilitating utilization of invasive species of economic value and agriculture bi-products  Diversifying from heavy water consuming enterprises to drought tolerant commercial  Developing sustainable utilization and management of rangeland practices to reduce  Monitoring Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO) use to ensure biodiversity losses and other negative impacts are kept in check.

2. Reduce poverty and improve food and nutrition security through sustainable use of natural resources, improved access to markets and improved disaster and risk management systems.

This can be achieved through:

Restoring and managing degraded land for adaptation benefits and mitigation co-benefits  Developing an integrated early warning and timely response climate information management system to help farmers and value chain actors take informed decision and  Facilitating production of diverse foods, biofortification and fortification to meet the  Improving alternative nutrition security with special focus on all vulnerable groups  Upscaling and replicating climate smart agriculture, (Crops, aqua-culture, fisheries, and livestock production) for improved food security and nutrition security and higher income  Managing alien/invasive species using the National Invasive Alien Plant Species Strategy to enhance productivity of rangeland, riparian areas and preservation of endemic species  Building the capacities and support communities towards a diversification of livelihoods to The Kingdom of Eswatini - Updated Nationally Determined Contributions  Intensifying post-harvest preservation and processing of foods to increase availability of  Promoting healthy eating and healthy lifestyles in line with adaptation needs.

1. Improve water governance and compliance to help manage water resources more efficiently and effectively to adapt to resultant water shortages from climate change 2. Develop water pricing structures to encourage efficient water use and scale-up smart metering 3. Strengthen the control and monitoring of water availability and use to protect surface and groundwater resources from over abstraction and impose timely restrictions when needed 4. Strengthen the capacity of early warning systems to improve preparedness and response while 5. Develop and implement catchment adaptation plans and strategies to promote ecosystem and 6. Control Invasive Alien plant species and pollution in catchments to protect water resources 7. Design and construct water storage infrastructure for multiple use i.e., large dams, earth dams, sand dams etc.

8. Enhance Water supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) Sector contribution to sustain healthy 9. Create an enabling environment for the governance of WASH activities to promote resilience 10. Assess sustainable water supply options beyond 2030 through conducting water assessments/studies to identify potable water supply sources, opportunities, and constraints 11. Secure climate proof water infrastructure including through developing resilient/ climate proof WASH infrastructure to increase community resilience and boost adaptive capacity.

1. Enhance legal, policy and institutional frameworks for health sector through  Mainstreaming climate change into the national health policy and other strategic  Strengthening climate-informed disease control programs and surveillance systems  Improving and integrating the health management information system with other systems from relevant sectors to achieve a centralized Monitoring Review and Verification (MRV)  Strengthening the preparedness and resilience of the health sector to respond to climate related emergencies and illnesses through preparedness plans and programs.

Strengthening capacity of healthcare workers on the adverse impacts of climate change;

Educating and informing the public of the needed measures to protect health from the adverse impacts of climate change.

3. Leverage the use of technologies to help health sector adapt to climate change through  Adopting sustainable climate smart technologies to enhance the resilience of communities to the adverse effects of climate change and  Establishing a multi-hazard early warning system to trigger prompt public health intervention when certain variables exceed a defined threshold.

4. Enhance adaptive capacity in the health sector through  Financing health actions to address inequities and climate related vulnerabilities  Promoting capacity building through research and development, education and awareness, and training in climate change related issues  Mainstreaming gender responsive climate policies and emphasize special efforts to support vulnerable groups (women, youth, and children) in climate change adaptation  Using co-benefits from mitigation measures e.g., clean technologies in waste and wastewater management, energy, etc.

1. Scale up actions and investments in ecological infrastructure including actions for  Strengthening Regenerative Landscape Management of degraded lands/ecosystems of  Improving conservation of genetic resources (indigenous trees and land races)  Restoring and protecting wetlands (areas of marshes, fens, peatlands, or water, including  Improving sustainable utilization of its resources for biodiversity and other benefits to communities.

2. Establish long term biodiversity conservation, landscape management and natural resources management through actions including increasing Protected Area Network and assess climate resilience of the protected areas to identify valuable ecosystem services be managed 3. Strategically plan and manage ecological infrastructure including grasslands, rivers, wetlands, woodlands, and forests including updating and implement the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) and ensuring that vulnerable ecosystems are addressed in national 4. Reduce pressures driving biodiversity loss (e.g., deforestation, human settlements) to improve 5. Properly manage quantity and quality of water resources for ecosystems and biodiversity 6. Manage and control invasive plant, fish and animal species and ecological pest management for increasing food sources, habitats, and income generation opportunities and 7. Conduct research, innovation, and knowledge sharing for income generation through use of tree resources and non-timber forest products.

The Kingdom of Eswatini - Updated Nationally Determined Contributions 1. Improve evidence base of climate change impacts on infrastructure to support decision making 2. Build capacity at institutional level and community level for mainstreaming climate change into 3. Climate proof existing infrastructure, particularly critical infrastructure 4. Develop nature-based solutions for urban infrastructure for adaptation benefits and disaster risk reduction to enhance resilience of urban dwellers 6. Implement integrated waste management for resilient ecosystems, reduced pollution, and 7. Build capacity and implement climate smart town planning for urban resilience and enhancing adaptive capacity of urban dwellers.

GHG emissions level.

The revised NDC of Eswatini represents a progression beyond the 2015 NDC by adopting several mitigation measures in the sectors of energy (including transport), waste, industrial processes, and product use (IPPU) and Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU) sectors. This the implementation of concrete actions that have been identified across key sectors. Most of the that are listed further and also lead to sustainable development co-benefits.

IPCC report.

Key contributions of Eswatini to the Paris Agreement The new and enhanced mitigation contributions of Eswatini for all sectors include:

Under transport sector the measures include: o Introducing commercial use of 10% ethanol blend in petrol by 2030 and o Conducting studies to assess the adoption of electric mobility options.

Reduce GHG emissions by 2030 compared to baseline scenario through improvements in waste treatment (including landfilling) across urban and rural areas. Key measures to be implemented include:

Decreasing open burning of municipal solid waste (MSW) 7 This includes existing grid connected capacity of 15.85MW. In addition, there are a number of smaller installations by companies and individuals for self-consumption, that is not included here. What is included here are the solar power contributions into the grid electricity supply only. 8 In 2010, 51MW of biomass electricity generation existed. 9 In 2010, access to clean fuels and technologies for cooking (% of population) was 33.0%. 10 Definition of the energy intensity in this context of Residential is energy use per household. 11 In 2010 energy intensity (residential) was 4846 kWh per household. 12 Definition of the energy intensity in the context of industry, commercial and public service and agriculture is energy use per unit of the sectors GDP (or unit of economic output). 13 In 2010 energy intensity (industry) was 0.072 kWh/E. 14 In 2010 energy intensity (commercial and public services) was 0.008 kWh/E. 15 In 2010 energy intensity (agriculture) was 0.1 kWh/E.

The Kingdom of Eswatini - Updated Nationally Determined Contributions  Increasing composting of organic waste (biological treatment), capturing 30% of the organic  Introducing Landfill Gas Recovery (LGR) in existing and new solid waste disposal sites  Conduct assessments and develop strategies to move from a linear economy to a circular economy model to support sustainable development in the country.

Reduce GHG emissions by 2030 compared to baseline scenario by implementing the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol and other measures. Key measures to be implemented include:  Substitution of HFC consumption for low-GWP alternatives under the Kigali Amendment implementation calendar including through:

Phasing out the use of HFC Eswatini is required to freeze HFC production and use in 2024, based on an average of HFC consumption of 2019, 2020 and 2021 levels  Servicing best practices that allow recovery and reuse of refrigerants and  Recovery and reuse of refrigerants contained in disposed equipment.

In the AFOLU sector Eswatini commits to move from Tier 1 to Tier 2 16GHG inventory and improve data degradation (including in mountain ecosystems) through restoration including tree planting and improving livelihoods through better livestock management. The country aims to plant 10 million trees.

Key contributions of Eswatini to the Paris Agreement 1. Build capacity in gender mainstreaming into climate action 16 IPCC provides guidance on methods for estimating emissions (and removals as appropriate) for each gas in mass units. A tier represents a level of methodological complexity. Tier 1 is the basic method, Tier 2 intermediate and Tier 3 the most demanding in terms of complexity and data requirements. Tiers 2 and 3 are sometimes referred to as higher tier methods and are generally considered to be more accurate on condition that adequate data are available to develop, evaluate and apply a higher tier method.

2. Enhance participation of women and girls in decision making to facilitate representation of gender issues and finding solutions to gender-based problems 3. Develop gender responsive policies and strategies in natural resource management and b. to harvest rainwater to improve health and adaptive capacity 5. Promote equitable access to natural resources, technology and finance including for domestic 6. Promote equitable access to knowledge and skills for women on waste management.

1. Build capacity of youth in climate policy development, accessing climate finance, to engage in income generating climate action including manufacturing of energy efficient technologies, retail and repair services, climate smart livestock practices, urban gardening, rainwater harvesting, sustainable api-culture, greenhouse farming and innovative agriculture technologies, agri-business, agroecological practices, agri-processing, water resource management technologies, water conveyance, waste management, green industrial processes, bottling and water purification and retrofitting buildings 2. Enhance participation of youth in decision making including in policies and projects 3. Promote entrepreneurship skills in climate smart technologies including renewable energy retail and repair, agriculture value chain, recycling and community waste solutions 4. Create youth led community centric awareness programmes on climate change adaptation and 5. Promote innovation in climate smart technologies including through innovation challenges and 1. Update and revise risk and hazard maps and collect data through research for risk reduction 2. Develop a multi hazard early warning system covering all relevant sectors with climate hazard 3. Modernise meteorological services to improve access to high quality weather data and support 4. Strengthen the capacity of early warning centres, for improved emergency preparedness, disaster risks and response capacities across all sectors and 5. Build capacity to monitor climate and disaster risks within relevant institutions.

6. Information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding of 1.Quantifiable information on the reference point (including, as appropriate, a base year) The Kingdom of Eswatini - Updated Nationally Determined Contributions The reference year for Eswatinis NDC is 2010.

The reference indicator will be quantified on the basis of the total net emissions of greenhouse gases (GHG) in the reference year of 2010 reported in the National GHG Inventory (2010). For reference purposes, the level of emissions of greenhouse gases for the base year is registered in the Third National Communication from Eswatini to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, submitted in April 2016. During the revision of this NDC, the greenhouse gas mitigation assessment aimed to estimate emissions of GHG for three scenarios:

Eswatini is not a major contributor to the global Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions, and yet remains vulnerable to climate change impacts. It is experiencing increase in annual average temperature, variation in precipitation, higher occurrence of hot days and cold nights, increase in frequency of extreme events like floods, droughts, and storms. These impacts felt by communities and ecosystems are reversing the development gains achieved till now. There is an urgency to act now as evidenced in the AR6 IPCC report. Investing in adaptation will help reduce the effects of climate change that are felt by the country today. Additionally, the cost of inaction will be too high with negative consequences to society, environment and the economy.

Conditional to Eswatini receiving financial, technology and capacity building support, there is potential for the country to reduce GHG emissions in the sectors of energy (including transport), waste, IPPU and AFOLU.

Increasing the share of renewable energy to 50% in the electricity mix by 2030 relative to 2010 levels through the adoption of solar, wind, biomass, hydro, and solar water heater technologies. Key measures to be implemented include:

17 This is the additional installation between 2011-2030 18 This includes existing grid connected capacity of 15.85MW. In addition, there are a number of smaller installations by companies and individuals for self-consumption, that is not included here. What is included here are the solar power contributions into the grid electricity supply only.

Electricity consumption in all these sectors is expected to continue to increase, but the country is committing to efficiency improvements that will reduce the speed of that growth.

Under transport sector the measures include:

19 In 2010, 51MW of biomass electricity generation existed. 20 In 2010, access to clean fuels and technologies for cooking (% of population) was 33.0%. 21 Definition of the energy intensity in this context of Residential is energy use per household. 22 In 2010 energy intensity (residential) was 4846 kWh per household. 23 Definition of the energy intensity in the context of industry, commercial and public service and agriculture is energy use per unit of the sectors GDP (or unit of economic output). 24 In 2010 energy intensity (industry) was 0.072 kWh/E. 25 In 2010 energy intensity (commercial and public services) was 0.008 kWh/E. 26 In 2010 energy intensity (agriculture) was 0.1 kWh/E.

The Kingdom of Eswatini - Updated Nationally Determined Contributions Reduce GHG emissions by 2030 compared to baseline scenario through improvements in waste treatment (including landfilling) across urban and rural areas. Key measures to be implemented include:  Decreasing open burning of municipal solid waste (MSW)  Increasing composting of organic waste (biological treatment), capturing 30% of the organic waste generated within the  Introducing Landfill Gas Recovery (LGR) in existing and new  Conduct assessments and develop strategies to move from a linear economy to a circular economy model to support sustainable development in the country.

Eswatini is committed to reducing its carbon footprint by adopting a circular economy model to reduce the pressure and adverse impacts on our natural environment, reduce resource use, maximise the value of materials through a life cycle approach.

Reduce GHG emissions by 2030 compared to baseline scenario by implementing the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol and other measures. Key measures to be implemented include:

Substitution of HFC consumption for low-GWP alternatives including through:

Phasing out the use of HFC Eswatini is required to freeze HFC production and use in 2024, based on an average of HFC  Servicing best practices that allow recovery and reuse of  Recovery and reuse of refrigerants contained in disposed equipment.

The major source of GHG data used for the projections are 2018 inventory and 2020 GHG inventory reports prepared for energy, waste, IPPU and AFOLU sectors. The following sources were also utilized to derive assumptions to project the emissions up to 2030.

Unpublished projections from National Accounts data  Unpublished GDP projections from National Accounts data Furthermore, extensive data collection and stakeholder engagement was done and impact of COVID-19 was explicitly accounted for in the economic projects used to estimate emissions.

The GHG emissions level for the BAU scenario and conditional targets in 2030 may be updated and recalculated depending on methodological changes in the GHG inventory, such as recalculating the GHG inventory with the 2006 IPCC Guidelines or changes in Global Warming Potential (GWP) in IPCC Assessment Reports, or the adoption of the 2019 IPCC Refinement. Information on updates made will be included in the Biennial Transparency Reports (BTR) and National Communications (NC). Furthermore, when more reliable data becomes available, the GHG inventory may be recalculated.

Timeframe for NDC implementation shall be 2021 to 2030.

Single year target in 2030.

Kindly refer to 1(d) above.

Information to be provided in Eswatinis inventory as part of the Biennial Transparency Report (BTR) will be consistent with the IPCC guidelines.

The Kingdom of Eswatini - Updated Nationally Determined Contributions guidelines;

Sectors covered: Energy, transport, waste, IPPU and AFOLU Gases covered: Carbon dioxide (CO2), Methane (CH4), and Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs).

Further, the NDC also covers short-lived climate pollutants (SLCP) including Black Carbon (BC) and other air pollutants such as Organic Carbon (OC), Particulate Matter (PM2.5 and PM10), Nitrogen Oxides (NOx), Non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOC), Sulphur dioxide (SO2), Ammonia (NH3), and Carbon Monoxide (CO).

Eswatini commits to extend over time, the scope of its NDC to all categories of anthropogenic emissions in line with paragraph 31(c).

The countrys adaptation action plan will result in several mitigation co- benefits:

Adaptation action in agriculture sector to restore and manage degraded land that will enhance carbon sequestration.  Adoption of Climate Smart Agriculture practices will contribute to the reduction of GHG emissions. Good farming practices will enhance soil health and carbon sequestration.

Wetlands provide valuable ecosystem services and restoring and protecting these areas is likely to help in reducing GHG emissions, increase carbon sequestration and build carbon stocks.

Nature-based solutions and retrofitting old building will help (a) Information on the planning processes that the Party undertook to prepare its nationally determined contribution and implementation plans, including: domestic institutional arrangements, public participation and engagement with local communities and indigenous peoples, in a gender-responsive manner.

Eswatini adopted a consultative process to develop the enhanced NDC which included review of its first NDC, assessment of the progress towards meeting the targets, realigning, and redefining sectoral targets based on national policies and identifying recommendations for framing the 2020 NDC. The process was aided through data collection, review of national policies, strategies, roadmaps and validated through consultations with stakeholders in Eswatini. Separate teams of local and international consultants were involved across sectors under the oversight of the Ministry of Tourism and Environmental Affairs (MTEA) and Ministry of Economic Planning and Development (MEPD). The review and recommendations were discussed through several meetings and capacity building sessions including with gender, disaster and youth experts and representatives.

The findings were validated by the Technical Advisory Group (TAG) and relevant stakeholders at the national and sub-national level. A high-level validation with stakeholders conducted and the enhanced NDC was thereafter approved by the Cabinet of Eswatini.

Eswatini is currently developing an implementation plan for its enhanced NDC for the sectors and targets indicated above through international support. The implementation plan will act as an overarching framework that will serve as the base for the country to implement projects and activities across sectors and also assist in identifying the support required in the long-term.

As the overarching objective of the NDC revision process was to further strengthen Eswatinis commitment towards climate action in addition to the previously identified measures and priority sectors in the first NDC.

The Kingdom of Eswatini - Updated Nationally Determined Contributions has resulted in significant contraction of growth.

b. Integration of national priorities with the NDC:

Paris Agreement;

National Development Plan.

Not applicable as Eswatini is not part of any joint agreement under Article 4, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement.

Eswatini is required to update its NDC by 2020 in line with Article 4 (Paragraph 9) of the Paris Agreement. Participation in the Talanoa Dialogue in 2018 garnered political momentum to undertake this NDC of the Paris Agreement;

5. Assumptions and methodological approaches, including those for estimating and accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and, as appropriate, removals adopted by the CMA.

Assumptions about socioeconomic development in Eswatini that informed the development of the baseline scenario were derived from national documents such as the Energy Master Plan 2034, Eswatini Population Projections Report 2018-2037, unofficial projections from National Accounts data and other national statistics. Impact of COVID- 19 was explicitly accounted for in the economic projections used to estimate emissions.

Eswatini followed the IPCC 2006 guidelines for the quantification of GHG emissions. For other pollutants, EMEP/EEA air pollution emission inventory guidebook was also used.

Kindly refer 5 (a) above. Eswatini will also apply sector specific assumptions and methodologies where required, when accounting for progress of various policies and mitigation measures under the requirements of the Biennial Transparency Report.

Eswatini will continue to follow methodologies and guidance as indicated in 5 (a) above.

The Kingdom of Eswatini - Updated Nationally Determined Contributions Eswatini followed the IPCC 2006 guidelines for the quantification of GHG emissions using Tier 1 methodology across all sectors.

Not applicable.

(f) Other assumptions and methodological approaches used for understanding the nationally determined contribution and, if applicable, estimating corresponding emissions and removals, including:

The 2030 emissions levels in the BAU scenario were projected based on assumptions for GDP, population, sectoral activity such as fuel consumption in the residential sector, industry and services, number of vehicles, electricity generation fleet, etc. In addition, national documents, strategies, and master plans were discussed with relevant stakeholders to construct the mitigation and adaptation measures. The impact of covid-19 on the economy was also taken into consideration. Studies included assessing GHG mitigation potential of actions which were discussed and validated with national stakeholders.

Short Lived Climate Pollutants (SLCP) and air pollutants were included in the mitigation assessment. Assumptions were made as to how the activity in each economic sector are likely to change into the future, based on national plans and reports, projections in changes in activity variables were linked to socioeconomic development in Eswatini, such as expected GDP and population growth. The impact of COVID-19 on the economy is explicitly accounted for in the economic projections used to estimate emissions.

Emission sources were grouped according to the IPCC source categories. Historical emissions of SLCP and air pollutants were analysed from 2010 to 2017.The GHG mitigation assessment conducted for Eswatini also quantified emissions of SLCPs and air pollutants, and their emission reduction potential.

None.

Eswatini is committed to contributing towards developing market mechanisms via international cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement. While at present, there is no clarity on Article 6, Eswatini does not exclude the possible of utilizing international market mechanisms to achieve its NDC targets.

6. How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in Although emissions are not significant compared to those of developed countries, there is potential to reduce emissions and the country has undertaken considerable efforts to achieve this. The first NDC communicated non-GHG action-based targets, Eswatini has taken progressive measures to define economy-wide GHG targets covering all priority sectors. The updated NDC of Eswatini represents its intention to adopt an economy-wide GHG emissions reduction target of 5% and potential to increase to 14% reduction with external financial support in 2030 compared to the baseline scenario. This translates to 1.04 million tonnes fewer GHG emissions in 2030 compared to a baseline scenario28.

As Eswatini did not commit to a quantitative emission reduction target in the 2015 INDC, the results from this GHG mitigation assessment provide a clear basis to increase climate change mitigation ambition in Eswatini, and provide a concrete set of actions through which this increase in ambition can be achieved.

Eswatinis enhanced NDC is more ambitious than before as the country as it has included more sectors. It has also set clear targets for priority adaptation sectors and included additional sectors. The enhanced NDC of the country has meaningfully included disaster risk reduction, gender and youth considerations into its mitigation and adaptation targets.

Agreement;

28 Baseline scenario means Business As Usual Scenario using historical data from 2010 to 2017 and an updated scenario showing change in GHG emissions from 2018 to 2030.

The Kingdom of Eswatini - Updated Nationally Determined Contributions Global emissions in 2018 was 45,873,85029 Gg of CO2eq and Eswatinis net emissions in 2018 was 3240.10Gg of CO2eq, therefore, Eswatinis share of global emissions is 0.007%. In this context, Eswatinis NDC contribution is considered fair and ambitious.

Agreement;

Eswatini has broadened its ambitions by expanding to new relevant sectors. Eswatini has also enhanced its adaptation commitments.

Agreement.

7. How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of in its Article 2;

Eswatini revised NDC is an indication of the countrys commitment in line with the objectives under Article 2 of the Paris Agreement and will contribute towards achieving the temperature goal agreed under Article 2 paragraph (a) and Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Paris Agreement.

Eswatini has enhanced its NDC by adding new sectors and measures. By presenting a more ambitious NDC, Eswatini understands it is significantly contributing to the "stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system, consistent with Article 2 of the UNFCCC. Furthermore, Eswatini believes it is contributing to the collective effort to hold "the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2C above preindustrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, consistent with Article 2.1(a) of the Paris Agreement. Eswatinis NDC is compatible with a long-term indicative objective of achieving carbon neutrality in 2050.

Eswatini can implement the NDC measures conditional to receiving finance, capacity building and technology development and transfer. The estimated total cost of implementing NDC is $950 million to $1.5 billion. A full cost estimation will be provided in the NDC implementation plan. Eswatini country needs technical capacities, technology transfer and skills development for implementing adaptation and mitigation measures. The country recognizes that Indigenous knowledge can help with and with all stakeholders to implement the NDC.

The Kingdom of Eswatini - Updated Nationally Determined Contributions Promise project.

