6. Mitigation Measuring, Reporting and Verification (MRV), and Adaptation Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) 20 Annex 1: Information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding (ICTU) of Ethiopias NDC 25 Figure 4: Overview of sectoral contributions to Ethiopia GHG mitigation targets 10 LIsT Of TABLEs Table 1: GHG emission projections in BAU, unconditional and conditional pathways 10 Table 2: Sectoral emissions in the business-as-usual/BAU and mitigation potentials by sector and conditionality 11 CMA Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia remains committed to an ambitious contribution towards the Paris Agreement goals of containing the global average temperature increase below 2C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit temperature increases to 1.5C. Given the devastating impacts that climate change is already having on our people, environment and economy, it is imperative that immediate global climate action is taken to increase climate resilience and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Recognizing Ethiopias national circumstances and capabilities, this updated Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) represents a clear progression in ambition with 68.8% emissions reduction target by 2030 from the Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario, which also seeks to inspire others to increase their contribution to this collective effort.

Ethiopias NDC is built on its Climate Resilience and Green Economy Strategy (CRGE) and set out an ambitious development trajectory that aims to reach lower-middle-income status. The CRGE is continuing to be one of the strategic pillars of the 10-Year Development Plan (10YDP) during in the NDC implementation period. We have undertaken economy-wide analysis and comprehensive stakeholder engagement to update our NDC, which builds on Ethiopias 1st NDC. These efforts generated a robust evidence base for identifying and prioritising mitigation and adaptation contributions, establishing intermediate indicators to measure progress towards the updated targets, and strengthening Measuring, Reporting and Verification and Monitoring and Evaluation systems.

This updated NDC provides a suite of sectoral priority interventions that will guide sectors, development partners, development financing institutions, the private sector, and other stakeholders in implementing the activities set out in this document. Ethiopia can achieve the ambitious vision presented in this updated NDC only in cooperation with our partners. Therefore, this is a call to action to all stakeholders to join hands and contribute to the realisation of this ambitious updated NDC.

Commissioner for the Environment, Forest, and Climate Change Commission of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia This document presents Ethiopias update to its first NDC, covering the period between 2020 and 2030. It builds upon several national climate and development policy initiatives including the first NDC, the CRGE mid-term review, the emerging 2050 Long Term Low Emission Development Strategy (LT-LEDS), the Green Legacy Initiative, and Ethiopias 10YDP which considers CRGE as one of its strategic pillars for the period 2020-2030.

In determining adaptation contributions, the following activities were undertaken: a review of Ethiopias adaptation policy, institutional landscape, and their respective challenges; setting a 2018 baseline and 2030 targets; prioritization of 40 adaptation interventions and the selection of accompanying indicators. Apart from this, a review of Ethiopias current measuring, reporting and verification (MRV) and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems was also conducted.

Ethiopia is a land-locked country located in the Horn of Africa and shares borders with Eritrea to the north, Djibouti and Somalia to the east, Sudan and South Sudan to the west, and Kenya to the south. Ethiopias topography is characterized by large regional differences, which are reflected in its climate. The lowlands in the southeast, covering approximately 55% of the countries land area and northeast are tropical with average temperatures of 25-30C, while the central highlands (over 1500 meters in elevation, covering about 45% of the countrys surface) are much cooler with average temperatures around 15-20C. The highland plateau is divided by the East African Rift Valley. Mean annual rainfall ranges from less than 300 mm in the south-eastern and north- western lowlands to over 2,000 mm in the south- western highlands. Because of this latitudinal and altitudinal contrasts, the climate system is equally extraordinarily complex.

Ethiopia has heavily invested in road and railway infrastructure, industrial parks universities, and the energy sector over the last decades. The 10YDP aims to build on the enhanced physical infrastructure to promote the industrial sector and achieve successful economic transformation. It envisions increasing the share of the manufacturing from the total GDP from the current level of 6.9% to 17.2% by 2030 (PDC, 2021). The plan also aims to achieve an average economic growth of 10% in the coming ten years (PDC, 2021). Agriculture, manufacturing, tourism, urban development and the mining sectors are going to be the priority sectors. The plan has also mainstreamed Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and climate resilient green economy in different sectors. This ensures that the legacy of green economic development path will extend into the future.

The Ethiopian economy is vulnerable to climate change. This is because the agriculture sector, which employed 78% of the countrys labour force in 2013, heavily relies on rainfall. Apart from this, nearly 80% of the population of Ethiopia lives in the rural area where most of them are smallholders who practice low input and low output farming in a very fragmented land (CSA, 2015). The vulnerability of the sector to climate change has urged the Ethiopian government to design strategies to mitigate the possible impacts of climate change. Hence, mitigation and adaptation activities have been already included in the sectoral plans and various initiatives. For example, the Agriculture Growth Program (AGP), the Livestock Master Plan (LMP), Livestock & Fisheries Sector Plan (LFSP) and the Sustainable Land Management Programme (SLMP) are critical programs in the agriculture sector and are also included in the National Adaptation Plan (NAP). The AGP enables improving agricultural productivity and commercialization of targeted smallholder farmers. The SLMP has been a way for mainstreaming green economy needs into sectoral programmes at all levels and it has been configured to the safety net programmes. NAP is a critical part of the CRGE that focuses on adaptation programs taken by each sector to build climate resilient economy. The ten years development plan inculcated the CRGE and the NAP to build climate resilient green economy in the coming years.

6% growth. However, other crises, although of smaller magnitude but serious nevertheless, have contributed to Ethiopias vulnerability. These include a desert locust invasion that affected at least one million people; erratic rainfall that disrupted the countrys dominant rain-fed agricultural sector as well as cholera, measles, and yellow fever outbreaks. Combined, these factors have a significant systemic shock that has profound implications for Ethiopia, both for short- and medium- to long-term which now require to be considered in all developmental planning processes,1 including updating of Ethiopias NDC. Nevertheless, the disruptions caused by the COVID-19 Pandemic also offer an opportunity to build forward greener. This NDC, mainstreamed in to the ten years development plan, sets out Ethiopias priorities in building its low carbon climate resilient future.

1 United Nations Ethiopia, Socio-economic Impact of COVID-19 in Ethiopia (2020).

Ethiopias policy framework for climate change mitigation and adaptation has progressively evolved since the ratification of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 1994. As part of its commitment, Ethiopia submitted to the UNFCCC its Initial National Communication (INC) in 2001 and Second National Communication (SNC) in 2015. The country also launched National Adaptation Plan of Action in 2007, Ethiopian Program of Adaptation on Climate Change and Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions in 2010. Ethiopia has endorsed a Climate Resilient Green Economy (CRGE) strategy to build a green and resilient economy in 2011. Apart from this, sectoral policies and strategies have been formulated to provide tailored and sector- specific strategic interventions. These include the following: the Climate Resilience Strategy for Agriculture and Forestry (2015); the Climate Resilience Strategy for Energy and Water (2015); the Climate Resilient Strategy for the Transport Sector (2015); the National Health Adaptation Plan to Climate Change (H-NAP, 2017) and the Climate Resilience Strategy for Urban Development and Housing (2017).

Ethiopia submitted its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) in 2015 and ratified the Paris Agreement (PA) in March 2016, turning its INDC into its NDC. Ethiopias first NDC aspired to reduce emissions from all sectors by 64% by 2030 from BAU scenario. As part of the endeavor to bolster national adaptive capacity, Ethiopia developed its National Adaptation Plan (NAP-ETH) in 2017. In order to implement NAP, subsequent strategies, notably the gender analysis for NAP; the National Adaptation Plan (NAP) Implementation Roadmap and NAP-ETH Resource Mobilization strategy were developed between 2018 and 2020.

Ethiopia has been implementing its climate change policy by mainstreaming into national development plans. In this regard, the CRGE strategy was mainstreamed into the Second Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP II) for the 2015-2020 period. The newly endorsed 10YDP has also set building climate resilient green economy as one of its strategic pillars. Ethiopia has also updated its NDC building on the 10YDP and with extensive review and participation of relevant stakeholders. The following figure summarizes Ethiopias climate change policy roadmap since 1994.

Ethiopia has progressively put in place an institutional architecture which follows sectoral approach to implement CRGE/NDC interventions. In this regard, the Environment, Forest and Climate Change Commission (EFCCC), is the lead agency for the coordination of Ethiopias response to climate change and is the national focal point to the UNFCCC; it formulates environmental laws and standards; and develops, coordinates and guarantees the implementation of sectoral programs and plans. A CRGE Facility was established in 2013, overseen by Ministry of Finance, which is responsible for financial aspects of CRGE implementation, while the Environment, Forests, and Climate Change Commission (EFCCC) is responsible for technical elements and day-to-day administration, as well as developing guidance and rules for CRGE implementation. The institutional arrangements reflect a cross-sectoral, multi-disciplinary approach organized through bodies like the inter-ministerial and management committee and allows for regional engagement. Most relevant line ministries have in-house CRGE directorates, units, or bureaus that focus on climate change policy implementation.

The NDC updating process has gone through a series of steps including extensive document review, data collection, model development and validation, as well as stakeholder consultations. In addition to this, the recent IPCC 2006 guideline has been used for estimating the GHG emission. The updating process employed Ethiopias Green Economy Model (GEM) to project the GHG emission pathways taking into consideration the Ethiopian development ambition from 2020 to 2030. Relevant data was collected from pertinent sources and sectors. In this regard, a recently updated livestock inventory, and updated global warming potentials (GWPs) as per the most recent IPCC Assessment Report (AR5) were used.

The technical analysis of the mitigation component comprises of five concisely defined methodological steps:

The adaptation component is based on a review of existing documents including NAP-ETH, the NAP implementation road map and its resource mobilization strategy, as well as the various sector-based vulnerability assessments. Then, the long list of actions has been discussed and prioritized. The required resource for realizing the NDC was estimated based on goals and targets of the 10YDP. The financial estimation further disaggregated the total required resource in to conditional and unconditional components. In addition, detailed gender and institutional capacity gap analyses were conducted to inform NDC updating process.

Higher robustness of GHG emissions pathways and targets through improvements in methodology, thereby more accurately and completely capturing historical emissions and emissions pathways through greater alignment with national GHG inventories, revised emission factors and improved consistency with the IPCCs 2006 guidelines.

Ethiopia proposes an emission reduction target of 68.8% which is more ambitious compared to its first NDC (64%).

Inclusion of a detailed adaptation baseline and 2030 targets. The first NDC did not have a quantified baseline and targets.

Clear demarcation between unconditional and conditional mitigation and adaptation interventions, with a meaningful domestic contribution, unlike the first NDC.

Commitment to explore further ambition increases during the NDC commitment period. This includes potentially enhancing Ethiopias NDC ambition by reducing emissions currently outside the scope of this NDC update, for instance for GHGs not covered by the current NDC (e.g., Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) in the context of the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol) where GoE initiatives on sustainable cooling are already underway and further mitigation potential exists.

Inclusion of additional adaptation interventions per sector.

Better adaptability and flexibility of the methodology to potential future changes of policies and external shocks.

An enhanced ability to track progress on mitigation and adaptation actions with improved MRV/M&E.

The updated NDC represents a clear progression in ambition for the following reasons:

Note: The graph NDC Conditional represents the combined impact of unconditional and conditional elements.

NDC Conditional (including unconditional) NDC Unconditional Business as usual/BAU Figure 4 above provides an overview of how each of the different sectors will contribute to this overall reduction.

It is crystal clear that the Ethiopian economy will undergo structural change in the coming years. The 10YDP signifies that the base of the economy will be anchored on the manufacturing sector. In addition to this, there will be high pace of urbanization. These emerging realities will have their own cumulative repercussion on the pattern of emission. Thus, emissions from industry and energy are expected to increase by a larger percentage compared to other sectors (Table 1). Nevertheless, the agricultural sector, particularly livestock will remain as the main contributor to the GHG emission in the coming years followed TABlE 1: GHG EMISSION PROjECTIONS IN BAU, UNCONDITIONAL AND CONDITIONAL PATHWAYS by the Land Use and Forestry sector. Both sectors together represent 83% (LUCF 35% and livestock 48%) of total BAU emissions in 2030. Important to note is that LUCF accounts for emissions from biomass use e.g., for cooking and baking, which is the single largest driver of LUCF-related emissions. The following table describes the contribution of each sector and sub sector to aggregate unconditional and conditional emission reduction targets, ordered by mitigation potential in each of the respective sector categories.

Whereas the mitigation potentials are represented at sector level considering all sector-relevant policies and variables as underlying interlinked drivers of emissions, activity level emission reductions are monitored and verified through sectoral MRV systems upon implementation of each activity in the context of the 10YDP. The projected emission reduction potential estimates by sector and pathways are described in detail in Table 2.

In the following sections, a detailed overview of sectoral emission and mitigation profiles will be presented. The conditional targets include unconditional ones for all sectors.

TABlE 2: SECTORAL EMISSIONS IN THE BUSINESS-AS-USUAL/BAU AND MITIGATION POTENTIALS BY SECTOR AND CONDITIONALITY significant GHG sink (Table 1 & Table 3). This equals a relative reduction of emissions of 171% (-240.1 Mt CO2eq) compared to BAU emissions in LUCF by 2030. The unconditional pathway foresees a reduction of emission levels to 91.8 Mt CO2eq, which represents a relative reduction of 34.6% of sectoral BAU emissions in 2030 (-48.4 Mt CO2eq) (Table 2).

The potential for net emission removals in LUCF can be realized through massive reforestation and restoration of a total of up to 15 million Increasing the share of agricultural land under  sustainable management practices Fuel switch: shift from unsustainable biomass  energy demand to electric stoves, renewable biofuels (e.g. residues) 20% moist Afromontane, 60% dry  Afromontane, 10% Acacia-Commiphora, 10% Combretum-Terminalia) Restoration of 5 million ha of land by 2030 and  9 million Ha by 2050 (conditional pathway) 10% moist Afromontane, 60% dry  Afromontane, 10% Acacia-Commiphora, 20% Combretum-Terminalia) for cooking and baking leads to substantively reduced pressure on forestry resources. All in all, the following table portrays the policy options of the sector in coming ten years.

The livestock sector exhibits the second most important mitigation abatements. It is also one of the most significant contributors to emission source under BAU assumptions contributing nearly 45% of total base year emissions in 2010 and almost half of the total BAU emissions in 2030. Given the economic importance and plans for a strong expansion of the sector, emission reductions are most visible in improved emission intensities of livestock production.

Policy interventions in this sector will reduce the emission level in 2030 to 180 Mt CO2eq in the conditional pathway. This new estimate of current and projected heads of livestock in the country as well as other key parameters (e.g., revised emission factors) significantly elevate BAU emissions of this sector compared to the first NDC. The sector has relative reduction of emissions of 7.6% (-14.8 Mt CO2eq) compared to BAU emissions in 2030. The unconditional pathway foresees a reduction of emission levels to 193 Mt CO2eq, which represents a relative reduction of 0.92% of sectoral BAU emissions in 2030 (-1/8 Mt CO2eq) (Table 2).

It is a vivid fact that the emission reductions in the livestock sector are to be achieved through packages of policy interventions combining mitigation, efficiency gains and output growth in the sector. In this regard, sector-specific strategies as well as national development plans have levied huge weight to the sector in a bid to reduce emission in the country. Thus, Livestock Master Plan (LMP), the 10YDP, and the CRGE strategy, have identified optimal policy interventions in the sector. Table 6 depicts the envisioned policies of the sector in the coming years emanating from these policy documents.

Replacing non-dairy cattle stock with chickens  (supply side) and inducing a demand shift from beef to chicken to 15 Mt CO2eq, which represents a relative reduction of 25.5% of sectoral BAU emissions in 2030 (-5.1 Mt CO2eq) (Table 2).

Policy interventions in the energy sector target energy consumed by all sectors (Table 5). Investments in the transport sector can contribute to reducing the demand for petroleum through leapfrogging to green mobility solutions, including e-mobility, railways and non-motorized transport. This mitigation contribution does not yet include clean energy exports to neighboring countries, which are projected to reach more than 5,000 MW/year once the Great Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is connected to the grid. This could represent an additional significant mitigation potential of several Mt CO2eq per year.

Economy-wide improvements of energy  efficiency of appliances, machinery and other capital assets Share of passenger kilometres travelled in public transport over total passenger kilometres travelled (%) Ministry of Trade and Industry; Ministry of Water, Irrigation and Electricity (MoWIE) The waste sector accounts for relevant emission sources with emissions emanating from municipal solid waste (MSW) generation, decomposition of organic components of waste on landfills, wastewater as well as from solid waste incineration. Mitigation action in the waste sector has a significant potential to reduce emissions. The sector contributes 3% of total BAU emissions in 2030. Despite small contributions to total BAU emissions, policy interventions in the sector can be highly effective. Conditional interventions can reduce the emission level in 2030 to 2.9 Mt CO2eq. This equals a relative reduction of emissions of 74.7% (-8.6 Mt CO2eq) compared to BAU emissions in the waste sector. The unconditional pathway projects a reduction of emission levels to 9.5 Mt CO2eq, which represents a relative reduction of 17.1% of sectoral BAU emissions in 2030 (-2.0 Mt CO2eq) (Table 2). The envisioned policy interventions are depicted in Table 6.

The share of manufacturing industry has been increasing over the recent past years and the 10YDP portrayed that its share will reach as high as 17.2% of GDP by 2030. This in turn increases the emission from the sector in the coming years. Cognizant to this, commensurate interventions have been proposed to reduce emission coming from the sector in the coming years. These interventions will reduce emission levels to 22.6 Mt CO2eq in 2030 in the conditional pathway (Table 1). This equals to a relative reduction of emissions of 13.4% (-3.5 Mt CO2eq) compared to BAU emissions. The unconditional pathway projects a reduction of emission levels to 27.3 Mt CO2 (Table 2). Interventions will reduce emission levels to 22.6 Mt CO2eq in 2030 in the conditional pathway (Table 1). This equals a relative reduction of emissions of 13.4% (-3.5 Mt CO2eq) compared to BAU emissions. The unconditional pathway projects a reduction of emission levels to 27.3 Mt CO2 (Table 2).

Most of the industries in Ethiopia are small and micro such that they dont emit much GHG. The cement sub sector is the major source of process-related emissions in the sector. Apart from this, Ethiopia plans in producing fertilizer which will increase GHG emission in the coming ten years. Cognizant to this, the principal policy to mitigate process-related emissions in the cement sector is clinker substitution while saving from increased nitrogen use efficiency. A shift away from synthetic fertilizer will be the prime mitigation strategy for the fertilizer sector.

Reducing emissions by aggressively diverting  organic materials from landfills, i.e. waste separation and composting Cognizant to this, the principal policy to mitigate process-related emissions in the cement sector is clinker substitution while saving from increased nitrogen use efficiency (Table 7).

The main drivers of emissions from managed soils are linked to fertilizers, crop residues, as well as urine and dung. Thus, the sector is directly linked to the livestock sector which comprises all emission- relevant policy interventions. Managed soils are represented as a separate sector to distinguish between livestock and crop production, and to align with IPCC guidance. While livestock-related agriculture represents 48% of BAU emissions in 2030, GHG emissions from crop production on managed soils contribute 3%.

Replacing clinker in cement with adequate  and available materials without compromising cement properties Ethiopia has been putting in place various policy actions that enhance the implementation of climate change adaptation over the last decade. Core policy and institutional measures have been materialized by mainstreaming climate change adaptation into national and sectoral plans with an emphasis on implementing identified adaptation options across selected sectors.

Given that the vulnerability of the country and less adaptative capacity to absorb external shocks emanated from the devasting effects of climate change and variability including hazards such as drought and floods, the government of Ethiopia has made Adaptation a priority. Within this context, prioritization of adaptation interventions becomes a powerful approach to ensure the effective and efficient utilization of the scarce resources available.

With the addition of the long-term priorities from the NAP Implementation Roadmap, the number of potential adaptation commitments to consider for inclusion in the NDC totals 52. While the selection of 18 adaptation options under the NAP and the numerous adaptation actions under the Implementation Roadmap already reflect a lengthy, rigorous, and officially endorsed prioritization process that entailed in-depth stakeholder participation (as detailed in the NAPs methodology), and was informed by an extremely broad range of national, sectoral, and technical studies (as noted in the NAP Implementation Roadmap methodology), attempts were made to further prioritize sub-set of interventions in the updated NDC.

Prioritization criteria were developed to select the optimal interventions (from within the NAPs adaptation options and the NAP Implementation Roadmaps supplementary adaptation actions). The internationally recognized and widely used PESTLE framework (an analytical framework for multi-criteria decision-making) was applied with each of the PESTLE categories-Political, Economic (and Financial), Social, Technological, Legal (and Institutional), and Environmental-defined with four relevant criteria.

In using the prioritization criteria to evaluate each adaptation option (from the NAP) and each long-term adaptation action (from the NAP Implementation Roadmap), 20 steps were taken for each of the 52 interventions screened, ranging from cross-referencing with the 10 YDP; NAP-ETH; relevant sectoral climate resilience or adaptation strategy; the NAP Implementation Roadmap to aligning with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction and African Unions Agenda 2063, and the AUs draft strategy on climate change 2015.

As captured in Annex 2 below, Ethiopias major climate change adaptation commitments are in the sectors of agriculture, land use and forestry, with additional adaptation contributions in water, health, energy, transport, and urban settlements. Agriculture, Forestry, and other Land Use (AFOLU) adaptation actions represent the bulk of the updated NDCs commitments for strengthening Ethiopias resilience to climate change. Ethiopia has already undertaken important adaptation efforts in these sectors, and will further expand and prioritize measures such as climate- smart agriculture; livestock diversification; drought-resistant animal breeding; rangeland management; improved drought-resistant crop varieties; crop and livestock insurance; watershed management and rehabilitation; ecosystem-based adaptation; sustainable forest management; community-based forest management and conservation; as well as afforestation and reforestation programmes. Across all these activities, a gender-responsive approach will be adopted and vulnerable groups and communities will be considered to ensure equity in sharing benefits that arise thereof the efforts. Together with these initiatives, efforts will be made to diversify adaptive livelihood alternatives that enhance households resilience to climate shocks in a manner that the livelihood options are friendly co-exist with the natural ecosystem.

The updated NDC has identified 40 adaptation interventions with a clear demarcation between unconditional and conditional, covering sectors such as Agriculture, Forestry, Water, Transport, Urban, Health, Land Use and Natural Resource Management, and Climate services and disaster risk reduction sectors (Figure 5). This includes mitigation interventions that have adaptation co-benefits and vice versa. Besides, a quantified baseline (2018) and 2030 target for each adaptation intervention has been identified for guidance on implementation and monitoring of the updated NDC. To enhance inclusiveness of the adaptation interventions, gender considerations and other cross-cutting issues have been sufficiently entertained in this NDC.

Adaptation interventions in the Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU) sector will be complemented with strategic adaptation actions in other economic sectors such as water (improving resilience of water sources and access to potable water), energy (energy diversity through alternatives and renewables), transport (climate resilient design of sustainable transportation systems, integrating climate change into transportation planning and development), urban settlements (urban greenery, adaptive urban planning), health (integrated environment and health surveillance protocols, improvement in basic health services and emergency medical services), and disaster risk reduction (improvement in early warning systems, improvement in disaster risk planning and preparedness).

6. Mitigation Measuring, Reporting and Verification (MRV), and Adaptation Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) accounting for market mechanisms, as well as provide information on sustainable development promotion, environmental integrity, and transparency. To this end, the NDC MRV and M&E framework will eventually be fully integrated with the 10YDP targets and indicators for each sector as shown in Figure 6 below. Therefore, the international support is critical in building capacity for stakeholders who will undertake the tracking, collection, and reporting of data, as MRV and M&E systems are prerequisite for successful implementation of this NDC including reporting to the global community (including UNFCCC and other key partners).

As shown in Figure 7, the financial resources required to implement the updated NDC in the next 10 years is estimated as USD 316 billion. The mitigation interventions identified in the updated NDC require USD 275.5 billion and adaptation actions require USD 40.5 billion. The financial estimates are derived from climate resilience plans of sectors and Ethiopias Ten Years Development Plan, which aims to build a climate resilient green economy by 2030.

Alike the GHG emission reduction targeting, 20% of the total estimated finance is unconditional while 80% is conditional. Ethiopia is committed to invest USD 63.2 billion on climate change mitigation and adaption actions from domestic sources, which is equivalent to an average annual investment of USD 6.32 billion by 2030. The conditional finance, which is equivalent to US$252.8 billion, should be received from international climate finance sources (Figure 8).

Beyond climate finance, significant level of ambition put forward by this NDC will also require a commensurate level of capacity building and technology transfer. Ethiopia has shown particularly high ambition both in mitigation and adaption across various sectors, with a particular emphasis on forestry, agriculture, energy, industry, and disaster risk reduction. In order to fully implement the mitigation and adaptation interventions proposed under the updated NDC, Ethiopia also seeks support on capacity building and technology transfer, among others, in the following areas:

Of the total financing needs is Conditional=$252.8 Billion Depending on International Strengthen MRV system and its institutional setup with adequate infrastructure and human resources: This  requires adequate staff levels with the required skill and knowledge, and institutional capacity to enhance the coordination of entities relevant for tracking the progress of NDC implementation and producing periodic reports.

Put in place a public expenditure review framework across all government institutions at all levels that  enable disaggregation of distinct budgetary flows and allocations.

Integration of MRV/M&E with general national statistical data management system.  Enhance accessibility and availability of data through the state-of-the art technology  Strengthen the coordination among sectors and regional counterparts to ensure better implementation,  monitoring and evaluation of NDC.

Catalyze technology transfer including clean cement production, early warning systems, sustainable  catchment and land use management.

Building a Climate Resilient Green Economy is one of the strategic pillars of the 10YDP. The commitment of the country to build CRGE has been furthered manifested by the fact that key climate related mitigation and adaptation indicators have been included in the key performance indicators of the plan at sector level. The inclusion of such climate indicators into the KPI has its own importance. In addition to tracking the implementation of NDC, it also paves the way to enrich the database of climate related intervention. This is because the inclusion of more climate indicators necessitates more baseline data that would trigger sectors and other responsible stakeholders to garner more data to track the progress of the NDC implementation. These would then help the upcoming NDC and other plans of the country to be based on adequate data and concrete information. This will also facilitate a linked but dedicated and robust measurement and reporting system for the NDC. It further allows the prevalence of valid reporting which will also aid the flow of climate finance. Dedicated climate change interventions, as well as all other interventions with climate change co-benefits will be designed to respond to clear climate change baselines and targets. This will help maximize future opportunities to reduce GHG emissions or reduce vulnerability associated with all government development programs.

The CRGE Facilitys technical unit (at the EFCCC) will establish a private sector liaison office (or officer) to ensure the actively engagement of the private sector on both resource mobilization as well as for technical partnerships in implementation of the NDC. This position, including its functions and mandate, could be created and brought into effect by 2021. The EFCCC should be accountable for monitoring the results of the office.

Ethiopia has expressed a strong desire to participate in carbon market opportunities offered through the PA. Ethiopias first NDC included has indicated an interest to participate in PA-backed carbon markets based on environmental integrity, robust accounting, and the promotion of sustainable development. Ethiopia has gained experience in participating in relevant carbon market initiatives (such as the Kyoto Protocols (KPs) Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), voluntary carbon standards, as well as emerging multilateral and bilateral approaches and is looking to develop its own domestic carbon market. However, the country has not been effective in hosting carbon market mechanisms relative to the mitigation potential and ambition set by CRGE and the NDC.

Ethiopia intends to address this prevailing gap by engaging in emerging international carbon markets governed by Article 6 of the PA. Ethiopia sees carbon markets as instruments to increase mitigation ambition and places high importance on environmental integrity through robust accounting as well as the promotion of sustainable development. To this end, the following activities will be undertaken as part of developing Ethiopias carbon market opportunities:

Information to Facilitate Clarity, Transparency and Understanding (ICTU) of Ethiopias NDC information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding (iCTu) of the updated Nationally Determined Contribution of Ethiopia for the timeframe 2020-2030 1. Quantifiable information on the reference point (including, as appropriate, a base year) a. Reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s) Updated base year is 2010. The reference year is 2020. The reference period is 2020-2030. The year for the Business as Usual (BAU) projection is 2030 b. Quantifiable information on the reference indicators, their values in the reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s), and, as applicable, in the target year The quantification of the reference indicator will be reported in Ethiopias Biennial Transparency Report and may be updated due to methodological improvements to the GHG inventory c. For strategies, plans and actions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement, or polices and measures as components of Nationally Determined Contributions where paragraph 1(b) above is not applicable, Parties to provide other relevant information d. Target relative to the reference indicator, expressed numerically, for example in percentage or amount of reduction At least a 68.8% reduction in economy wide emissions by 2030 against the BAU projection Modelling the projections (BAU and target  reductions) was based on an economy wider integrated assessment model (the Green Economy Model) prepared for the Government of Ethiopia information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding (iCTu) of the updated Nationally Determined Contribution of Ethiopia for the timeframe 2020-2030 f. Information on the circumstances under which the Party may update the values of the reference indicators The national total GHG emission for 2020 may be updated in line with methodological improvements as they arise a. Time frame and/or period for implementation, including start and end date, consistent with any further relevant decision adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA) a. General description of the target The combined mitigation target (unconditional and conditional elements) corresponds to a reduction of 68.8% compared to the BAU projection by 2030. The unconditional component foresees emission reductions of 14% and the conditional component contributes to approximately 54.8% compared to the BAU projection by 2030 b. Sectors, gases, categories and pools covered by the Nationally Determined Contribution, including, as applicable, consistent with Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) guidelines The key sectors covered by this NDC are the following:

Greenhouse Gases include:

c. How the Party has taken into consideration paragraph 31(c) and (d) of decision 1/CP.21 Para. 31(c) Parties strive to include all categories of anthropogenic emissions or removals in their Nationally Determined Contributions and, once a source, sink or activity is included, continue to include it Para. 31(d) Parties shall provide an explanation of why any categories of anthropogenic emissions or removals are excluded All major sources of GHG emissions in the GHG inventory have already been covered in this NDC update, including land use change and forestry. Since Ethiopia is an LDC, remaining gaps result from lack of reliable data information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding (iCTu) of the updated Nationally Determined Contribution of Ethiopia for the timeframe 2020-2030 d. Mitigation co-benefits resulting from Parties adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans, including description of specific projects, measures and initiatives of Parties adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans Mitigation co-benefits associated with adaptation actions will be included. Some of the adaptation actions with the greatest mitigation co-benefit potential includes the following:

Strengthening sustainable natural resource  management through safeguarding landscapes and watersheds for enhanced climate resilience Rehabilitation of degraded lands and restoration  of degraded forestland through natural regeneration to enhance landscape-based climate resilience Afforestation and reforestation of degraded  lands through tree planting to restore forest ecosystems enhance for enhancing landscape- based climate resilience Implementing forest protection and health  enhancements measures in natural forest ecosystems to enhance landscape-based climate resilience Building sustainable transport systems for  resilience through enhanced access to mobility Improving provision and condition of housing for  enhanced human safety against climatic stressors a. Information on the planning processes that the Party undertook to prepare its Nationally Determined Contribution and, if available, on the Partys implementation plans, including, as appropriate information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding (iCTu) of the updated Nationally Determined Contribution of Ethiopia for the timeframe 2020-2030 The CRGE and sectoral policies and strategies formed the basis for Ethiopia in in its first NDC. It was also later mainstreamed into the second Growth and Transformation Plan (GTPII) for the 2015-2020 period for continuity This NDC has been developed in the context of the overarching CRGE pillar strategy and in light of the 10 years development plan. (2020-2030). The key targets and baseline indicators from the 10YDP have formed the basis for the baseline and targets for this updated NDC i. Domestic institutional arrangements, public participation and engagement with local communities and indigenous peoples, in a gender-responsive manner The 10YDP and the NDC are aligned and implementation of one will help secure the implementation of the other Public participation was integral to the preparation of the NDC and the10YDP upon which it is based. Consultations with line ministries and workshops with a wide range of sector representatives were held to agree on actions, indicators and targets. Consultation with non-state actors and donors were also held as part of finalising the NDC document a. National circumstances, such as geography, climate, economy, sustainable development and poverty eradication See section 2 and 2.1 above  More information can be found in the new 10 Years Development Plan (10 YDP) and Ethiopias 2nd Communication to the UNFCCC information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding (iCTu) of the updated Nationally Determined Contribution of Ethiopia for the timeframe 2020-2030 b. Best practices and experience related to the preparation of the Nationally Determined Contribution The NDC preparation was undertaken though participatory process with immense engagements from the respective line ministries and stakeholders. Line ministries were engaged in the development process through a technical working group. The full alignment with the overall development planning cycle and the NDC reference period will ensure better coordination and effective implementation of Ethiopias climate priorities c. Other contextual aspirations and priorities acknowledged when joining the Paris Agreement Ethiopia has set an ambitious development trajectory that aims to reach - middle-income status through green economy pathways as set out in its national Climate Resilience and Green Economy (CRGE) Strategy d. Specific information applicable to Parties, including regional economic integration organizations and their member States, that have reached an agreement to act jointly under Article 4, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement, including the Parties that agreed to act jointly and the terms of the agreement, in accordance with Article 4, paragraphs 1618, of the Paris Agreement e. How the Partys preparation of its Nationally Determined Contribution has been informed by the outcomes of the global stocktake, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreement f. Each Party with a Nationally Determined Contribution under Article 4 of the Paris Agreement that consists of adaptation action and/or economic diversification plans resulting in mitigation co-benefits consistent with Article 4, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement to submit information on the following:

i. How the economic and social consequences of response measures have been considered in developing the Nationally Determined Contribution ii. Specific projects, measures and activities to be implemented to contribute to mitigation co-benefits, including information on adaptation plans that also yield mitigation co- benefits, which may cover, but are not limited to, key sectors, such as energy, resources, water resources, coastal resources, human settlements and urban planning, agriculture and forestry; and economic Specific activities and associated indicators have been identified for adaptation and mitigation in the 10YDP and the supporting technical documents prepared as part of this NDC update initiative.

On mitigation they cover:

5. Assumptions and methodological approaches, including those for estimating and accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and, as appropriate, removals a. Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals corresponding to the Partys Nationally Determined Contribution, consistent with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 31, and accounting guidance adopted by the CMA GHG emission pathways were built on the Green Economy Model, which is aligned with the IPCC guidance as well as SNA 2008, as appropriate (IPCC Guidelines 2006) b. Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for the implementation of policies and measures or strategies in the Nationally Determined Contribution c. If applicable, information on how the Party will take into account existing methods and guidance under the Convention to account for anthropogenic emissions and removals, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 14, of the Paris Agreement d. IPCC methodologies and metrics used for estimating anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals The NDC update builds on the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories and 2013 IPCC Kyoto Protocol Supplement. Moreover, Ethiopia uses the Global Warming Potentials on a 100-year time scale according to the IPCCs 5th Assessment Report to calculate CO2 equivalents of GHG emissions e. Sector, category or activity-specific assumptions, methodologies and approaches consistent with IPCC guidance, as appropriate, including, as applicable i. Approach to addressing emissions and subsequent removals from natural disturbances on managed lands If applicable, the approach will be in accordance with relevant IPCC Good Practice Guidance on LUCF ii. Approach used to account for emissions and removals from harvested wood products information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding (iCTu) of the updated Nationally Determined Contribution of Ethiopia for the timeframe 2020-2030 iii. Approach used to address the effects of age- class structure in forests;

f. Other assumptions and methodological approaches used for understanding the Nationally Determined Contribution and, if applicable, estimating corresponding emissions and removals, including i. How the reference indicators, baseline(s) and/or reference level(s), including, where applicable, sector-, category- or activity- specific reference levels, are constructed, including, for example, key parameters, assumptions, definitions, methodologies, data sources and models used The projected BAU, unconditional and conditional GHG emission pathways and resulting 2025 and 2030 targets have been simulated with the Green Economy Model. The Green Economy Model has been developed in accordance with IPCC 2006 guidelines for GHG inventories; consistent with decision 18/CMA.1 ii. For Parties with Nationally Determined Contributions that contain non-greenhouse- gas components, information on assumptions and methodological approaches used in relation to those components, as applicable iii. For climate forcers included in Nationally Determined Contributions not covered by IPCC guidelines, information on how the climate forcers are estimated g. The intention to use voluntary cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, if applicable Ethiopia expresses a strong interest for voluntary cooperation in emerging international carbon markets governed by Article 6 of the Paris Agreement. Ethiopia sees carbon markets as instruments to increase mitigation ambition and places high importance on environmental integrity through robust accounting as well as the promotion of sustainable development. Ethiopia therefore invites interested Parties to explore engaging in cooperative approaches 6. How the Party considers that its Nationally Determined Contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances a. How the Party considers that its Nationally Determined Contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding (iCTu) of the updated Nationally Determined Contribution of Ethiopia for the timeframe 2020-2030 Ethiopia considers its ambitious NDC to be fair in terms of meeting the long-term goal set by the Paris Agreement, in particular in light of her LDC status and multiple development challenges resulting from climate vulnerability Through this update, Ethiopia has increased the ambition of its NDC in the following ways:

This NDC update covers major sources of emissions, but also considers national circumstances. The preparation of Long-Term Low emission development strategy is underway 7. How the Nationally Determined Contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2 a. How the Nationally Determined Contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its article 2 As explained under 6a above, this NDC contributes towards the objective and long-term goal of the Paris Agreement. It includes actions to address the mitigation of its GHG emissions as well as adaptation of the country to climate change. Ethiopia is committed to deploying domestic resources to this NDC, but as a highly indebted LDC is also reliant on international flows of finance to meet its ambitious targets b. How the Nationally Determined Contribution contributes towards Article 2, paragraph 1(a), and Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Paris Agreement Enhance food security by improving agricultural productivity in a climate-smart manner (promote yield increasing techniques) Diversify livestock and animal mix, including promotion of poultry and small ruminants 2 There is a need to refine definitions of climate indicators Vs development indicators in the next 5 years for clearer distinction of climate and development actions.

3 Quintal = a unit of weight equal to 100 kg. 4 Represents indicator, baseline (2020) and target (2030) figures obtained from Ethiopias 10YDP; other targets and baseline are from sectors.

