CMA Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris ICTU Information necessary to facilitate Clarity, Transparency and Understanding 1) Mauritius net greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in 2016 were 4,881 kilo tons carbon dioxide equivalent (ktCO2eq), including removals from Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF), representing less than 0.01 percent of global GHG emissions. However, the Republic of Mauritius is highly vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change.

2) Mauritius submitted its Intended Nationally Determined Contributios (INDC) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Secretariat on 28 September 2015 ahead of the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP-21) to the UNFCCC. The INDC was complemented by the NDC Action Plan prepared in February 2016.

3) Mauritius commitments to combat climate change are ambitious given its national circumstances. This ambition is reflected in the mitigation and adaptation strategies and measures in which the Government of Mauritius has committed since the ratification of the Paris Agreement, and will continue to be engaged in.

4) The Climate Change Act was gazetted on 28 November 2020 and it entered into force on 22 April 2021. Under the Act, the Department of Climate Change is responsible to coordinate the implementation of relevant commitments to ensure compliance with the international climate change agreements. An Inter-Ministerial Council on Climate Change is provided to set national objectives, goals and targets with a view to make Mauritius a climate resilient and low emission country. A Climate Change Committee has also been set-up to enable a multi- stakeholder participation for the preparation of the national climate change strategies and action plans for mitigation and adaptation.

5) In light of the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities and in view of different national circumstances, and the principles of flexibility as inscribed in the Paris Agreement and decision 18/CMA.1, Mauritius reporting and transparency will improve over time. In this context, Mauritius NDC may be subject to future improvements, corrections, recalculations and/or modifications. Following the submission of this NDC, Mauritius will develop an Action Plan including details about policies and measures on mitigation and adaptation.

6) Based on current projections, Mauritius aims to reduce overall GHG emissions by 40% in (including LULUCF) in 2030. Compared to the 2015 INDC target of 30% GHG emissions reduction by 2030, the mitigation ambition of Mauritius in this updated NDC is significantly enhanced.

7) This economy-wide emissions reduction target comprises sector specific mitigation targets for energy, transport, waste and Industrial Processes and Product Use (IPPU). The energy sector represents the largest share of GHG emissions reduction by 2,311 ktCO2eq.

8) Mauritius confirms its commitment to implement policies and measures on LULUCF and Agriculture sectors in line with its national policy and strategy documents on climate change and sustainable development.

9) Several key decisions have already been taken by the Government of Mauritius to implement this NDC within the 2030 timeframe for the energy sector, including, as a matter of example the following:

the production of 60 percent of energy needs from green sources by 2030;

the total phasing out of use of coal before 2030 and the development of the biomass framework;

an increase in energy efficiency by 10 %, based on the 2019 figures.

10) Mauritius actions on adaptation are centred around the 2021 Updated National Climate Change Adaptation Policy Framework that focuses on the potential of nature-based solutions for adaptation and provides a new policy orientation in key adaptation sectors to build resilience as it follows:

The enhancement of the knowledge base regarding the risks of climate change and the impacts on communities;

Developing and implementing an integrated approach which combines the following sectors namely; Fisheries (Blue Economy), Tourism, Biodiversity (Terrestrial and Marine), Forestry, Agriculture and Coastal Zone;

Enhancing strategic frameworks to address policy gaps and improve expertise in the  Increasing resilience of human-led activities whilst preserving ecosystem functions, mechanisms, for infrastructure and disaster risk reduction sectors.

11) Building on current adaptation actions and policies, a more detailed list of actions is provided in the part on Adaptation Communication.

12) The implementation of mitigation and adaptation actions as identified in this NDC is unconditional as well as conditional on external financial support received.

13) The total financial needs to implement the NDC targets are estimated at USD 6.5 billion. The total needs for implementing the mitigation and adaptation actions identified in this NDC are estimated respectively at USD 2 billion and USD 4.5 billion.

14) The share for the unconditional1 and conditional contributions for the USD 6.5 billion is as follows:

1 Unconditional refers to national effort, that is, what a country can implement without any conditions and based on its own resources and capabilities, both public and private sector contributions.

Information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding (ICTU) of the updated NDC of the 1. Quantifiable information on the reference point (including, as appropriate, a base year) (a) Reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s) Business as Usual (BAU) scenario of projected GHG emissions to 2030, with 2016 as most recent comprehensive GHG inventory.

(b) Quantifiable information on the reference indicators, their values in the reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s), and, as applicable, in the target year;

Based on the national GHG emissions inventory 2000-2016 to be included in the first Biennial Update Report (BUR under finalisation) to the UNFCCC, Business As Usual (BAU) greenhouse gas emissions are estimated at around 6,900 ktCO2eq in 2030 including LULUCF. This value is the result of recalculations from the INDC baseline scenario (7,000 ktCO2eq). BAU GHG emissions levels per sector in 2030 are provided here below:

The baseline scenario is also providing data for the years 2040 and 2050, with respectively the following estimates: 8,384 ktCO2eq and 9,976 ktCO2eq.

(c) For strategies, plans and actions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement, or polices and measures as components of nationally determined contribution where paragraph 1(b) above is not applicable, Parties to provide other relevant information Relevant strategies, plans, and actions include:

Renewable Energy Roadmap 2030 for the Electricity Sector (currently being revised)  Budget Speech 2021-2022 announcing coal phase out before 2030 among other mitigation and adaptation measures by the Minister of Finance, Economic Planning and Development  Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMA) on the Development of a National Mitigation Strategy and Action Plan (under finalisation)  National Adaptation Plan (NAP) for health and other sectors namely infrastructure, bridges and culverts, DRR-flood prone areas and coastal zones (under preparation through Green Climate Fund assistance)  National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Policy, Strategic Framework and Action Plan 2020-2030  Strategic Plan for the Food Crop, Livestock and Forestry sectors 2016-2020 (under revision) (d) (d) Target relative to the reference indicator, expressed numerically, for example in percentage or amount of reduction;

The quantified mitigation target is equivalent to 40% reduction of GHG emissions by 2030 compared to the BAU scenario. The contribution by each sector to the 40% mitigation target in terms of avoided emissions (ktCO2eq) is as it follows:

Energy excluding transport: 2311 (Renewable Energy Roadmap for the Electricity Sector 2019, Government Programme 2020 -2024, Government Budget 2021 - 2022, Mauritius Renewable Energy Compact 2021)  Transport: 129 (combination of on-going government policies and Research Paper2)  Waste: 313 (Waste Management Sector Review and GHG Emission Reduction Potential, 2021)  IPPU: 55 (Mauritius commitment under the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol) Amongst others, the following key decisions have been taken by Government of Mauritius to mitigate GHG emissions across the above sectors:

Energy: The production of 60% of energy needs from green sources by 2030, the total phasing out of the use of coal before 2030, increasing energy efficiency by 10 % based on the 2019 figures.

Smart Agricultural Practices, including natural farming systems and agro-forestry, promotion of efficient irrigation techniques. (Strategic Plan for the Food Crop, Livestock and Forestry Sectors, 2016- 2020 is under review).

LULUCF: Massive planting of trees.in Mauritius and Rodrigues. Restoration and plantation of native forests, (National Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans 2017- 2 Prakash N.K. Deenapanray, Nassir A. Khadun. Land Transport greenhouse gas mitigation scenarios for Mauritius based on modelling transport demand. Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives 9 (2021) 100299 2025). Plantation of mangroves. Compared to the 2015 INDC target of 30% GHG emissions reduction, the mitigation ambition is significantly enhanced.

Data source for the quantified information is the National GHG Inventory, covering the period 2000-2016. The methodology is based on the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. GHG emissions and removals were computed by applying the IPCC inventory software. A combination of Tier 1 and Tier 2 approaches was used.

(a) (f) Information on the circumstances under which the Party may update the values of the reference indicators: Values of the reference indicators (base year, reference period, and reference level) may be subject to recalculations and technical corrections, as prescribed in decision 18/CMA.1. Information on updates will be provided in future reporting documents to the UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement.

Impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the GDP and energy consumption/CO2 emissions The COVID-19 pandemic is causing disruption of unprecedented dimension in economic activities in Mauritius like in many other countries in the world. The impact of COVID-19 is being felt in a number of sectors and the hardest hit are tourism and exports industries. The Government of Mauritius has already implemented a number of policies by increasing resources for the vulnerable groups and supporting businesses access to finance. It is expected that the economy will contract by 5.4% in fiscal year 2020-2021 but will return to the positive territory with an expected growth rate of 4.5% in 2021- 2022 and 5% in 2022-2023. For the fiscal years 2020/21 - 2022/23, 6% of the total public investments will be dedicated to environmental protection.

(a) Time frame and period of implementation:

(b) Whether it is a single-year or multi-year target, as applicable:

(a) General description of the target:

Absolute economy-wide emissions reduction target compared with a BAU scenario by 2030. (b) Sectors, gases, categories and pools covered by the nationally determined contribution, including, as applicable, consistent with Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) guidelines;

Sectors covered: - Energy excluding Transport - Transport - Waste - Industrial Processes and Product Use (IPPU) - Agriculture - Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) All categories and pools in Mauritius GHG inventory are consistent with the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines.

Gases covered:

- Carbon dioxide (CO2) - Methane (CH4) - Nitrous oxide (N2O) - Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) (c) How the Party has taken into consideration paragraphs 31 (c) and (d) of decision 1/CP.21;

All categories of anthropogenic emissions or removals are included in Mauritius NDC. (d) Mitigation co-benefits resulting from Parties adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans, including description of specific projects, measures and initiatives of Parties adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans.

(a) Information on the planning processes that the Party undertook to prepare its NDC and implementation plans, including:

(i) Domestic institutional arrangements, public participation and engagement with local communities and indigenous peoples, in a gender-responsive manner;

The NDC was elaborated under the coordination of the Department of Climate Change in the Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change taking into account the countrys national circumstances, challenges and opportunities for mitigation and adaptation. Information obtained in collaboration and consultation with a wide range of stakeholders, academic experts and technical consultants, served as additional inputs on the potential of future technologies for long-term mitigation in Mauritius. Based on the policy documents available, stakeholder consultations have also been carried out, including with members of the public, in order to obtain feedback on possible measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The elaboration of the NDC included consultations with local communities (notably Rodrigues). The collaboration and consultation of representatives from the ministry responsible for gender equality were also essential for considering gender-responsive measures. A particular attention was also given to vulnerable groups, especially in the Outer Islands. Specific mitigation and adaptation actions are dedicated to Rodrigues in order to adopt coherent and locally adapted actions.

(ii) Contextual matters, including, inter alia, as appropriate: National circumstances, such as geography, climate, economy, sustainable development and poverty eradication;

a. National circumstances, such as geography, climate, economy, sustainable development and poverty eradication;

The Republic of Mauritius consists of the islands of Mauritius, Rodrigues, Agalega, Tromelin, Cargados Carajos, and the Chagos Archipelago, including Diego Garcia and any other islands comprised in the State of Mauritius. The Republic of Mauritius has an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of approximately 2.3 million km2. It also shares joint jurisdiction with the Republic of Seychelles over an extended continental shelf area of about 400,000 km2 in the Mascarene Plateau region. The island of Mauritius has an area of 1,868.4 km2 and is made up of a central plateau gradually rising towards the southwest. Mauritius landscape includes ranges of mountains with peaks, isolated mountains, hills, river valleys, waterfalls, plateaus and plains form the relief of Mauritius. The countrys natural resources include arable land and access to fishing areas.

Mauritius is home to 690 native species of plants of which 281 have been identified as being endemic. Plants are critically endangered (45%), 73 are endangered (26%), 35 are vulnerable (12,5%), 235 are threatened (84%), 3 are near threatened, 4 are least concerned, 7 are extinct, 10 are possibly extinct. In addition, between 2006 and 2016, 59% of plants have seen their status get worse, while only 15% have improved their status. The climate in Mauritius can be described as tropical, modified by southeast trade winds. Mauritius is characteristic by warm, dry winters (May to November) and hot, wet, humid summer (November to May). The country is highly vulnerable to climate change effects such as intense cyclones, abnormal tidal surges, prolonged droughts, flash floods, increase of sea surface temperature, and sea level rise. The countrys economy is based on agriculture, exports (seafood, textiles and apparel, and sugar), financial services, and tourism. Sustainable development Mauritius is fully committed to the implementation of Agenda 2030 and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG). The country was actively involved in the negotiations leading to the adoption of the post- 2015 framework. Following the adoption of the 2030 Agenda, Mauritius has turned its attention towards its implementation. Mauritius is currently developing its policy framework for pursuing the SDGs known as Vision 2030. Within the 2030 Agenda, Mauritius has submitted its first Voluntary National Review (VNR) Report to the High Level Political Forum of United Nations Economic and Social Council in 2019. The VNR takes stock of the unique journey Mauritius has travelled in nation building and development process aimed at transforming and modernising the country.

Concerning the vulnerable groups (20% of the population) living in environmentally fragile areas in low coastal zones, actions like construction of refuge centre at Quatre Surs and sea wall against storm surge at Rivire des Galets, desilting and cleaning of rivers are being carried out in adjoining residential areas prone to flooding to reduce flood impacts by the government. The National Disaster Scheme 2015 is being implemented at all levels. Poverty eradication Approximately 10 % of the population in Mauritius live in relative poverty. According to the Poverty Analysis Report of Mauritius in 2017, poverty is more prevalent among specific groups such as people with low education, the elderly, single parent households, families with three or more children and women. Several actions have been taken by the national government to eradicate poverty: the Marshall Plan Against Poverty, the Social Integration (2016) and Empowerment Act of 2016, public-private partnership initiatives. In this context, special efforts are being made by the National Womens Entrepreneur Council through several entrepreneurial projects to empower women to address gender-related poverty (70,942 out 131,300 Mauritians who were poverty-stricken, were women according to 2017 statistics).

b. Best practices and experience related to the preparation of the nationally determined contribution; A comprehensive participatory process was followed to allow stakeholders participation in the preparation of this NDC. The Department of Climate Change (DCC) took a holistic perspective, facilitating opportunities for optimising Mauritius climate efforts, including consideration of possible trade-offs or synergies across the various climate sensitive sectors. The final version of this NDC was approved by the Inter-Ministerial Council on Climate Change, provided under the Climate Change Act, which was held on 28 September 2021. An awareness raising strategy and communication plan has been prepared to sensitize various stakeholders (women association, youth leaders, senior citizens, fishers, planters, academia, professionals, students, private sector, civil society and NGOs) on the NDC. The final version of this NDC will be communicated through videos, a dedicated website and translated in local language (Creole).

c. Other contextual aspirations and priorities acknowledged when joining the Paris Agreement; Mauritius will continue to engage with stakeholders (including businesses, civil society, youths, students, women, senior citizen and the research community) to co-create and co-deliver solutions, amplify awareness, and encourage a whole-of-nation effort to address climate change. Mauritius believes that setting out the climate policy aspirations and strategies well in advance will help provide a clear sense of direction, minimise any negative disruptions to the economy and workforce and keep Mauritius competitive in a carbon- constrained world. In this regard, Climate Change is reflected, inter alia, in the following national policies and strategy documents  Guideline for Climate Change Adaptation Strategy Coastal Setback (2016);

Grid Code for Medium Scale Distributed Generation (MSDG) (2016);

Net-Metering (Medium Scale Distributed Generation MSDG) (2016);

the Master Plan for Energy Efficiency/Demand Side Management and Action Plan for the period 2016 to 2030;

Further, besides the Climate Change Act, 2020, the existing regulatory framework to fight against climate change has been strengthened with the following climate change  related legislations:

Mauritius Meteorological Act, 2019.

In March 2021, the RoM prepared the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Policy, Strategic Framework and Action Plan reports, which are closely aligned with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 and provide a pathway for achieving the internationally agreed priorities for action and targets in the Sendai Framework.

Other initiatives and programmes to improve climate resilience are as follows:

The Adapt' Action Programme financed by AFD to the tune of EURO 2 million for the implementation of first Mauritius Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC).

Two NAPs are being formulated to enhance resilience to climate change: (a) one on Infrastructure, bridges and culverts, DRR- flood prone areas and coastal zones, for a total of USD 2.5 million from the Green Climate Fund (GCF) and (b) another on health for a total of USD 425,000 from the GCF.

Technical assistance on Institutional Gaps and Needs Assessment to operationalize the Department of Climate Change (Euro 100,000)  Operational study of the coastal risks in Mauritius and Rodrigues (coastal erosion and coastal inundation) (Euro 1 million)  Vulnerability Assessment and Analysis in the Agriculture sector (USD 105,000) under the SADC regional climate change programme  Development of long term strategies (2050) for the following sectors: energy, transport, agriculture and tourism (Euro 1.1 million) under AFD Facilit 2050 (b) Specific information applicable to Parties, including regional economic integration organizations and their member States, that have reached an agreement to act jointly under Article 4, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement including the Parties that agreed to act jointly and the terms of the agreement, in accordance with Article 4, paragraphs 1618, of the Paris Agreement;

(c) How the Partys preparation of its nationally determined contribution has been informed by the outcomes of the global stocktake, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreement;

The first global stocktake will take place in 2023. Mauritius participated in the Talanoa Dialogue in 2018, which generated political momentum for enhanced climate action, including calling for Parties to update their NDCs. The preparation of Mauritius enhanced NDC was informed by the recommendations of the Talanoa Call for Action, taking into account the countrys national circumstances.

(d) Each Party with a nationally determined contribution under Article 4 of the Paris Agreement that consists of adaptation action and/or economic diversification plans resulting in mitigation co-benefits consistent with Article 4, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement to submit information on:

(i) How the economic and social consequences of response measures have been considered in developing the nationally determined contribution;

(ii) Specific projects, measures and activities to be implemented to contribute to mitigation co- benefits, including information on adaptation plans that also yield mitigation co- benefits.

Several projects and activities will be implemented to contribute both to mitigation and adaptation actions as identified in this NDC. This is the case of, for example, the promotion of a circular economy, the adoption of a climate-smart agriculture, sustainable value chain tourism project and the development of green buildings and green urban planning. See information at 3 (d) 5. Assumptions and methodological approaches, including those for estimating and accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and, as appropriate, removals:

(a) Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals corresponding to the Partys nationally determined contribution, consistent with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 31, and accounting guidance adopted by the CMA.

For accounting its anthropogenic GHG emissions and removals in the national GHG inventory, Mauritius uses the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, IPCC Good Practice Guidance and Uncertainty Management in National Greenhouse Gas Inventories and 2013 Supplement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Wetlands (collectively, the 2006 IPCC Guidelines). Assumptions and methodological approaches underlying Mauritius NDC are outlined in end notes and are consistent with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 31, and decision 4/CMA.1.

(b) Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for the implementation of policies and measures or strategies in the nationally determined contribution See 5(a) above. Mauritius will also apply specific assumptions and methodologies, where relevant, when accounting for progress of various policies and measures in its BUR. (c) If applicable, information on how the Party will take into account existing methods and guidance under the Convention to account for anthropogenic emissions and removals, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 14, of the Paris Agreement, as appropriate See 5(a) above.

(d) IPCC methodologies and metrics used for estimating anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals Mauritius emissions for carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide and hydrochorofluorocarbons, were derived using the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. Tier 1 methodologies were used for most emission estimates.

Higher tier methodology will be used, where relevant and depending on availability of data.

Global Warming Potential data (GWP) from the IPCC Second Assessment Report (SAR) have been used. (e) Sector-, category- or activity-specific assumptions, methodologies and approaches consistent with IPCC guidance, as appropriate, including, as applicable:

(i) Approach to addressing emissions and subsequent removals from natural disturbances on managed lands; Mauritius intends to report GHG emissions and removals from the LULUCF sector in accordance with the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, from Tier 1 to Tier 2 level where available and covering all prescribed land-use categories and all carbon pools. The 2013 Supplement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Wetlands will also be incorporated. GHG emissions and removals from natural disturbances, if any, will be accounted for in accordance with the prescribed 2006 IPCC Guidelines, coupled with field inventory measurements where applicable.

(ii) Approach used to account for emissions and removals from harvested wood products;

(iii) Approach used to address the effects of age-class structure in forests;

Mauritius estimates GHG emissions and removals in the LULUCF sector with up to Tier 1, and above where feasible, and apply high-resolution satellite images, coupled with collection of country-specific data resulting from field inventory measurements undertaken at regular intervals and estimated by modelling approaches. The field measurements will take into consideration tree growth information across the range of tree species and diameter classes for all forest types.

(f) Other assumptions and methodological approaches used for understanding the nationally determined contribution and, if applicable, estimating corresponding emissions and removals, including:

(i) How the reference indicators, baseline(s) and/or reference level(s), including, where applicable, sector-, category- or activity-specific reference levels, are constructed, including, for example, key parameters, assumptions, definitions, methodologies, data sources and models used;

Sectoral studies were taken from various sources, including an assessment of Mauritius economy-wide energy efficiency potential. An Exponential Smoothing (ETS) model was used for the BAU scenario, taking into accounts the countrys national circumstances and challenges (as outlined in Section 6 below). Additional studies and technology roadmaps developed in collaboration with industry stakeholders, academic experts and technical consultants, served as additional inputs on the potential of future technologies for long-term mitigation in Mauritius. Studies under the UNDP Climate Promise Initiative by Heat GmbH 2021, have also provided inputs for calculation of avoided GHG in the waste sector. Stakeholder consultations were also carried out to obtain feedback on possible measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

The scope and coverage of Mauritius NDC contains non-GHG components, such as the adaptation communication section.

(iii) For climate forcers included in nationally determined contributions not covered by IPCC guidelines, information on how the climate forcers are estimated;

The scope and coverage of Mauritius NDC, as indicated in Section 3 above, do not include climate forcers not covered by IPCC guidelines.

(iv) Further technical information, as necessary;

(g) The intention to use voluntary cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, if applicable Mauritius intends to continue using voluntary cooperation to achieve its mitigation objectives. Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) projects are already implemented and on-going.

6. How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances (a) How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances; The updated NDC identifies ambitious mitigation measures to combat climate change in priority sectors (Energy, Transport, Waste, IPPU, Agriculture and LULUCF). In particular, Article 4, paragraph 3, of the Paris Agreement is addressed:

(b) Fairness considerations, including reflecting on equity;

(c) How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 3, of the Paris Agreement;

Consideration of the fairness and ambition of Mauritius NDC must take into account the following:

(d) How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement;

Mauritius updated NDC is moving towards an economy-wide absolute GHG emissions reduction target, which reflects its effort as a developing country Party to address Article 4, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement.

(e) How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement.

Mauritius updated NDC is an economy-wide absolute GHG emissions limitation target which complies with the Article 4, paragraph 6 of the Paris Agreement. The adaptation actions and policy plans reflect Mauritius special circumstances as a SIDS.

7. How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2 (a) How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2; Mauritius Climate Change Act 2020 and NDC target to reduce GHG emissions by 40% by 2030 are important milestones, in line with the objectives of the Paris Agreement, and is aimed at achieving the long- term temperature goal set out in Article 2 of the Convention. Given its unique national circumstances and particular set of challenges, Mauritius NDC is challenging and ambitious, and aims to support the collective effort to reach global peaking of GHG emissions as soon as possible, as set out in Article 4.1 of the Paris Agreement.

(b) How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards Article 2, paragraph 2(a), and Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Paris Agreement.

Adaptation communication as part of the updated NDC of the Republic of Mauritius for the timeframe 2021-2030 - (Guidance provided by 9/CMA.1) Mauritius is particularly vulnerable to severe weather events and natural disasters such as cyclones, storms and tidal surges, torrential rains, floods and flash floods, landslides, tsunamis. Exposure to natural hazards remains very high and continues to increase and having integrated measures of the extent and costs of vulnerability are essential to identify priority areas for adaptation, mitigating the impacts of climate change. In terms of institutional arrangements, the distribution of responsibilities among key institutions on areas pertaining to climate change adaptation are presented hereafter:

Gender, , , education and social security are also addressed as cross-cutting issues. In addition to the institutions included in the table, the following departments, divisions and committees also exist and collaborate with each other as well as with external organizations and initiatives to foster and ensure coordination on environmental and climate change matters:

The Department of Climate Change under the aegis of the Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change (MoESWMCC) the aegis of the Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change (MoESWMCC)  The Department for Continental Shelf, Maritime Zones Administration and Exploration of the Prime Ministers Office.

Finally, it is also important to mention the local authorities (for instance under the Climate Change Charter for Local Authorities), the civil society and the private sector (for instance Business Mauritius) as key stakeholders in enabling the implementation of adaptation measures in the country.

Monitoring in the decade 1998-2007 has showed that sea level rise by 18 to 59 cm by the end of the century, with an estimated rate of increase of 5.6mm per year for Mauritius, whereas the increase yearly increase in Port Louis amounted to 2.1 mm per year.

At Port Louis, during the last decade (period 2011 to 2020), analysis of sea level has increased by 8 mm per year as compared to the long-term mean rise of 4.7 mm per year (between 1987 and 2020). Sea level rise is projected to be of the order of 49 cm by 2100 (Updated National Climate Change Adaptation Policy Framework, 2021) As a SIDS, it is essential for Mauritius to take this into consideration and undertake significant adaptation measures to reduce its vulnerability. Cyclones 3 SSP5-8.5 represents the high end of the range of future pathways, corresponding to RCP8.5. Source: MMS According to the countrys disaster risk profile (DRP Mauritius, 2016), flooding is the second-largest risk after cyclones, causing 20 per cent of direct economic losses associated with disasters and will experience on average around 22 million USD yearly direct losses from flooding. It is also estimated that nearly 60% of the direct losses from flooding are from the residential sector and 20% from the commercial sector. (DRM: A Capacity Diagnosis, 2020)- Cadri Partnership.

5 Statistics Mauritius (2021). Digest of Environmental Statistics  2019.

6 Boojhawon, A., Surroop, D. (2021). Impact of climate change on vulnerability of freshwater resources: a case study of on Climate Change. Republic of Mauritius, Port Louis.

(c) National adaptation priorities, strategies, policies, plans, goals and actions The National Climate Change Adaptation Policy Framework (NCCAPF) of the Republic of Mauritius, was elaborated based on the analysis of the current and projected climate change impacts. It recommends adaptation policy options and measures around the water demand and supply, agriculture and terrestrial ecosystems, fisheries and marine ecosystems, tourism and coastal areas, human health, and infrastructure sectors.

-Enhance knowledge base related to climate change risks to coastal ecosystems and communities; -Mainstream climate change in the sectoral policies/strategies/plans; -Enhance disaster preparedness and response mechanisms and implementing risk reduction measures; -Improve the governance to build resilience in an uncertain future; -Reduce vulnerability to natural disaster risks; and -Increase resilience of human-led activities whilst preserving ecosystem functions Development and implementation of sustainable fishing management plans, strengthening of institutional capacity and adaptation of infrastructure (quay) to climate change (sea level rise) Enhance the knowledge base regarding the risks of climate change for the fisheries sector and the impacts on communities Improve management of marine and terrestrial protected areas and expansion of protected area network including rehabilitation of wetlands, seagrass, mangrove plantation, increase in tree coverage areas and coral reef rehabilitation/farming Development of sustainable landscape management and Ecosystem-based adaptation/nature based solutions Mainstreaming of climate change adaptation in the health sector to respond to population increase and its additional climate-related health burden. Development and implementation of a communication, education and awareness strategy with respect to climate change risks and impacts on human health. Improve surveillance of diseases associated with climate change and develop and implement a decentralized alert and rapid response mechanism Framework 2021:

Fostering an integrated planning and implementation approach between the water and agricultural sectors. Establishing an integrated framework for the management of fisheries founded on the Blue Economy concept, which includes coastal zone management and marine biodiversity conservation Fostering an integrated approach combining the goals and targets for the fisheries and tourism sectors with the coastal zone management sector, and additionally with the marine biodiversity sector. Developing and implementing an integrated approach which combines tourism, biodiversity, forestry and agricultural sectors with the coastal zone management. Enhancing strategic frameworks to address policy gaps and improve expertise in the Health sector including through integrating climate risks into planning and developing policies in the National Adaptation Plan.

Increasing resilience of human-led activities whilst preserving ecosystem functions, through improving governance, enhancing disaster preparedness and response mechanisms, are recommended for Infrastructure and disaster risk reduction sector.

In alignment with the previous NCCAPF (2012) and other national priorities, the current updated NCCAPF (2021) focuses on the potential of nature-based solutions (NbS) for adaptation, as well as green job creation, managing thus the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, while addressing some of the most pressing issues regarding biodiversity and sustainable resource management. In alignment with the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2017-2025, the updated NCCPAF promotes Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EbA) which harnesses biodiversity and ecosystem services to reduce vulnerability and build resilience to climate change. Several acts are already implemented and are relevant for climate change adaptation. The legislation listed below has been identified:

In addition, several strategies and action plan are in place, with the aim of setting the ground for action in vulnerable sectors in relation to climate change:

Master Plan for the Development of Water Resources in the Republic of Mauritius (2012)  National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Policy, Strategic Framework and Action Plan 2020- 2030 Moreover, building on current adaptation actions and policies, the following list of actions is identified:

Develop novel systems of irrigation and sensitize planters in vulnerable areas on water saving systems  Increase water production capacity of existing desalination plants in Rodrigues  Construction of break water e.g. in the Port Area.

(d) Implementation and support needs of, and provision of support to, developing country Parties Mauritius will need international support to implement the adaptation measures and the priority adaptation actions for the main sectors (see section c above). The indicated financial need of meeting this requirement is estimated at USD 4.5 billion (Mauritius island and Rodrigues Island) by 2030.

(e) Implementation of adaptation actions and plans, including: (i) Progress and results achieved; (ii) Adaptation efforts of developing countries for recognition; (iii) Cooperation on enhancing adaptation at the national, regional and international level, as appropriate; (iv) Barriers, challenges and gaps related to the implementation of adaptation; (v) Good practices, lessons learned and information-sharing; (vi) Monitoring and evaluation Adaptation and resilience-building efforts will focus on tangible and intangible investments, infrastructure, capacity building, and project-based initiatives and interventions. The priority is placed on defending the existing physical and cultural assets and resources, and developing good practices. Several challenges are identified as barriers to the implementation of adaptation, such as conflicting timescales, conflicting interests, limited financial resources, insufficient human resources, inadequate technical expertise and technology, uncertain societal costs and future benefits, and fragmentation within and between scales of governance. The adaptation ambition has been enhanced compared to the 2015 INDC target, with more specific and targeted actions: responsible institutions, risks and vulnerabilities, relevant legislations, policies and programs are added.

(f) Adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans, including those that result in mitigation co-benefits See 3.d) in Information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding (ICTU) of the updated NDC of the Republic of Mauritius for the timeframe 2021-2030 (g) How adaptation actions contribute to other international frameworks and/or conventions Several adaptation actions contribute to the implementation of other international frameworks through building inter-linkages and synergies as follows:

The SDG alignment analysis developed by Heat GmbH in 2021 shows that overall the adaptation actions of the NCCAPF 2021contribute to the achievement of specific SDG targets namely SDG 1 on Poverty, SDG 6 on clean water and sanitation, SDG 9 on industry, innovation and infrastructure, SDG 13 on Climate Action, SDG 14 on life below water and SDG 15 on life on land.

Mauritius increasingly focuses on social inclusion including through stronger engagement with local communities for gender-responsive adaptation measures. For example, the Marshall Plan Against Poverty adopts a community-based approach: the vulnerable segments of the population are envisioned to better integrate into the social, political and economic life of the country, with attention to gender equality and young people. Gender mainstreaming the Government of Mauritius. All climate change adaptation projects are designed to integrate gender The Climate Change Act 2020 also makes provisions to commission studies on climate change, taking into consideration, inter alia gender issues. The Awareness Strategy and Communication Plan, 2021 by Digital Kites under UNDP 2021, have also catered for gender in the proposed campaigns.

