Overview of Mongolias Nationally Determined Contribution Mongolia has developed its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), which was approved by the Government Decree No.407 of November 2019, with the aim to contribute to the Paris Agreement. In the NDC, Mongolia has enhanced its mitigation efforts with policies and measures to be implemented in key economic and natural resource management sectors by 2030.

The mitigation target of Mongolias NDC will be a 22.7% reduction in total national greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 2030 (Figure 1), compared to the projected emissions under a business as usual scenario for 2010. In addition, if conditional mitigation measures such as the carbon capture and storage and waste-to-energy technology are implemented, then Mongolia could achieve a 27.2% reduction in total national GHG emissions. Along with that, actions and measures to remove GHG emissions by forest are determined, which set the total mitigation target of Mongolia as 44.9% of GHG emission reduction by 2030.

Figure 1. Comparison of BAU baseline GHG emission and mitigation scenarios (Mt 2-eq.) .

In the development of this NDC, Mongolia re-calculated the baseline emissions up to 2030, which are estimated to reach 74.3 Mt 2-eq. in 2030 without LULUCF, compared to 2015s INDC baseline of 51.3 Mt national GHG emissions excluding land use, land use change and forestry (LULUCF) by 2030. Adaptation needs and priorities are determined broadly in the NDC, considering the country specific solutions in order to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of response measures to climate change. US$6.3 billion for mitigation, and US$5.2 billion for adaptation.

A. Nationally Determined Contribution Target compared to the business as usual scenario, excluding LULUCF.

Metric applied IPCC Second Assessment Report (SAP), 100-year time horizon Global 2006 IPCC Guidelines for national GHG inventories (non-energy sector) 2006 IPCC Guidelines for national GHG inventories For the achievement of NDC targets, it is imperative to develop a national roadmap, which reflects all actions and measures along with guidelines for sectors and integrate these actions into the Government action program and the national budget.

The integration of NDC targets into the development of policy documents is beneficial to mobilize climate finance and explore international cooperation and support.

One of the advantages of the NDC is that the principle targets presented in the NDC are in line with the national development policy documents such as the Vision-2050, which covers the development framework reflected in the following documents:

- Green development policy of Mongolia, 2014 - National action program on climate change, 2011 - Sustainable development vision-2030, 2016 - State policy on the energy sector of Mongolia, 2015 - State policy on food and agricultural sector, 2010 - National program on energy saving, 2017 These national strategy and policy documents, as well as relevant legal instruments define stakeholders responsibilities and monitoring structure for implementation of the NDC.

Emission target by 2030 (Mt CO2-eq.) 57.4 GHG emission reduction target (Mt 2-eq.) 16.9 Sectors Energy sector:

Non-energy sector:

GHG emission reduction from conditional measures, (Mt 2-eq.) 3.3 Total GHG emission reduction (including conditional measures), (%) 27.2% Total GHG emission reduction (including conditional measures and forest (including conditional measures and forest sinks) 44.9% Actions planned GHG emissions reduction, Gg 2-eq.

Improved efficiency of energy production  Reduce electricity and heat transmission and distribution grid losses  Reduce the internal use of combined heat and power plants (CHPP)  Improve the heat supply in cities and towns (improving the efficiency Transportation:

Switch the coal export transportation to rail transport from auto  Switch the heating of passenger train to electric heating Construction:

Insulate old precast panel buildings in Ulaanbaatar city  Limit the use of raw coal in Ulaanbaatar city and switch to the use of Industry:

Total GHG emission reduction from the energy sector 11,264.6 Agriculture:

Regulate and reduce the livestock number  Improve the livestock manure management Industrial Processes and Product Use (IPPU):

Waste:

Reduce the waste volume for landfill through the improved waste  Increase the share of the population with access to improved Total GHG emission reduction from the non-energy sector 5,623.5 sustainable development of the sector and reducing the impacts and risks associated with climate change.

Maintain the ecosystem balance by strengthening the legal environment and pastureland management;  Sustainable use of pastureland by increasing the forage cultivation and water supply for livestock;  Enhance the disaster prevention system against drought and dzud.

Enable the sustainable supply of healthy livestock, raw materials for the light and food industries through the agricultural products, by properly utilizing the positive impacts and reducing the adverse impacts of climate change in the agriculture sector.  Save water for irrigation by using plastic- films/mulches on potato and vegetable fields;  Reduce water use and irrigation costs by applying drip and infusion systems in irrigated potato, vegetable, fruit, and berry productions;

Protect the soil from wind, water erosion and damages, and sustain a high yield by applying straw mulches for non-irrigated crop and forage fields;  Reduce soil moisture loss and damage of mechanical structure soil and reduce direct tillage costs by eliminating mechanical tillage and implementing zero- tillage technologies.

Strengthen the legal and institutional frameworks for integrating sectoral coordination to ensure water security;

Enhance the resilience of the water sector through the utilization of appropriate technologies for conservation, restoration, sustainable use and increase water resources.

Create forest ecosystems well adapted to climate change and enhance carbon sink by management.

Implementing forestry measures such as thinning and deadwood removal to improve forest structure and conditions and to create a highly productive and climate change-resilient forest;

Increasing non-carbon and socio-economic benefits of forests by implementing sustainable forest management.

Maintain the long-term adaptive opportunities for vulnerable biodiversity to climate change by increasing special protected areas through the better management of protected areas border and connectivity;

Determine vulnerable dry-land ecosystems and soil organisms to climate change, and identify and evaluate vulnerable functional groups, indicator species, and develop and implement a relevant plan for action;

Implement protection and sustainable management measures for enhancing the recovery capacity of vulnerable and unique ecosystems; implement a pilot research project on climate change in different landscapes covering high mountain, forest, meadow, fresh water, wetland, peatland, steppe, Gobi Desert, etc.

Build resilience to natural disasters by reducing the risks and adapting to impacts of climate and weather-related hazards and disasters.

Conduct and regularly update risk assessments for natural disasters, and reduce the disaster risks based on the partnership of various stakeholders;

Reduce disaster-related losses and damages by strengthening the capacity of early warning systems for climate, weather-related hazards and disasters, and by enhancing the system for effective and timely dissemination of climate and disaster-related information;

Integrate disaster risk reduction measures into development policy planning, introduce techniques and technologies in disaster risk reduction, and increase investment and financing.

Assess the risks and impacts of climate change on public health, and conduct research specifically focusing on the risk of spreading tropical diseases and infections from other regions with endemic diseases due to a possible shift of climate zones, while Mongolian people; develop plans to reduce potential risks;

Build knowledge and awareness regarding climate change impacts and adverse effects on human health, and empower the general public for adopting protective behaviours;

Strengthen the readiness and capacities of health institutions and organizations to respond to public health risks induced by climate change.

Identify social groups vulnerable to climate change and build their resilience to overcome the risks;  Reduce vulnerability by diversifying economic activities, increasing income, expanding income sources and supporting sustainable livelihoods;  Ensure equality for the vulnerable groups and increase employment by providing knowledge and education.

Financial Support The financial needs for the NDC implementation are estimated initially as US$11.5 billion, of which US$6.3 billion for mitigation, and US$5.2 billion for adaptation.

Technology Transfer In order to solve problems, the focus has to be made on soft approaches rather than solely relying on hard ones, including indigenous knowledge of local communities, combining traditional practices with modern know-hows. For determining the most suitable, efficient, and effective technologies, Mongolia needs to conduct the technology needs assessment.

Building capacities to disseminate and transfer scientific information and knowledge and educating the public and various stakeholders on climate change, its impacts, as well as potential mitigation and adaptation measures are an essential precondition for the successful implementation of Mongolias NDC.

