Ghanas Revised Nationally Determined Contribution under the Paris Agreement Updated Nationally Determined Contribution under the Updated Nationally Determined Contribution under the  2021 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Ministry of Environment, Science, The comments and opinions contained in this document are those of the Environmental Protection Agency and the Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation (MESTI) and may not reflect the opinions of other Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) or other external bodies. The EPA and MESTI have compiled this document in good faith, exercising all due care and attention. The EPA does not accept responsibility for any inaccurate or incomplete information supplied by third parties. No representation is made about the accuracy, completeness or suitability of the information in this publication for any purpose.

The EPA/MESTI shall not be liable for any damage which may occur to any person or organisation acting or not based on this publication. The effort has been made to ensure facts and data are correct and up to date where possible at the time of writing and editing. However, it is acknowledged that many of the topics covered in this document are dynamic. Therefore, some information may not reflect the current situation. Use of this document as reference material accurate and relevant.

This publication should be cited as follows:

MESTI. (2021). Ghana: Updated Nationally Determined Contribution under the Paris Agreement (2020  2030) Environmental Protection Agency, Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation, Accra.

Ghana believes that if no rapid action is taken to address climate change and its negative impacts now, the future cost will be prohibitive and counterproductive to the socio-economic gains made today. Therefore, responding to climate change issues is top on the national development agenda. That is why Ghana committed to implementing thirty-one mitigation and adaptation actions across seven economic sectors in its nationally determined contribution to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 2015.

In line with Article 4 of the Paris Agreement and UNFCCC decisions 1/CP.21 and 4/CMA.1, Ghana has updated its nationally determined contribution under the Paris Agreement from 2020 to 2030, considering its unique circumstances. The update affirms the country's resolve to address the impacts of climate change on the country's economy and its vulnerable people. The update covers 19 policy areas and translates into 47 adaptation and mitigation programmes of action. The 47 climate actions are expected to build the resilience of over 38 million people, generate absolute greenhouse gas emission reductions of 64 MtCO2e, create over one million jobs, avoid 2,900 deaths due to improved air quality by 2030.

The update of the nationally determined contribution was based on extensive stakeholder consultations with relevant institutions at both national and sub-national levels, with the involvement of Ministries, Departments and Agencies, Metropolitan, Municipal, and District Assemblies, development partners, private sector, academia and Civil Society Organisations. The Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation will work with relevant sector institutions and stakeholders to implement the nationally determined contribution to accelerate our development efforts and enhance the well-being of our people. It is my cherished hope that the Updated Nationally Determined Contribution will serve as a development efforts and enhance the well-being of our people without sacrificing the quality of the environment and its resources.

CMA Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris CARES COVID-19 Alleviation and Revitalization of Enterprises Support EMEP/EEA European Monitoring and Evaluation Programme/European Environment ITMOs Internationally Transferred Mitigation Outcomes MESTI Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation MMDAs Metropolitan, Municipal and District Assemblies UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change The preparation of Ghana's revised nationally determined contribution to the UNFCCC has been two years of a great learning experience, collaborations and amazing teamwork. On behalf of the Government of Ghana, the Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation (MESTI) wishes to show appreciation and recognise the immense contribution of all those who offered their distinguished service to prepare this report.

The Government appreciate the UNDP and the Donors of NDC Support Programme for funding enthusiastic partnership with the UNDP. We greatly benefitted from great insight, advice and guidance. We hope that our existing organic partnership will grow in leaps and bounds in implementing the programmes in the nationally determined contribution. It is also worthwhile revised nationally determined contribution:

All state institutions, the private sector, academia, CSOs and the Donor Partners engaged in the process. We truly appreciate the level of dedication and commitment you exhibited.

The Chief Director of MESTI, Executive Director and Management of EPA provide strategic technical guidance and direction in the revision process.

The nationally determined contribution team (at MESTI, EPA, and all the MDAs) is dedicated and supported to the national assignment.

The national experts provided technical inputs and advice to enrich the process and quality of the document.

All the international partners that provided the technical report.

In this regard, we want to recognise contributions we received from the Initiative for Climate Action Transparency (ICAT) Project, EU Delegation, GIZ and the UK Government. Ghana further acknowledges the contribution of the Climate and Clean Air Coalition (CCAC) Supporting National Action and Planning on SLCP mitigation (SNAP) initiative and the Stockholm of Short-Lived Climate Pollutants and air pollution benefits within the revised Nationally Determined Contribution.

2. Ghana's Updated Nationally Determined Contribution 8 3. Nationally Determined Contribution and National Development 9 4. Making the Nationally Determined Contribution Work 10 4.1 Institutional Support for Ghana's Nationally Determined Contribution 10 4.3 Financial Needs for Implementing the Revised Nationally Determined Contribution 10 4.4 Technology and Capacity Needs for the Revised Nationally Determined Contribution 10 5. National Arrangement for Tracking Nationally Determined Contribution 11 6.1 Annexe 1: Information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding of Ghana's revised and enhanced nationally determined contribution according to the guidance in 6.2 Annexe 2: Adaptation and Mitigation Contribution Table 25 under the Paris Agreement for 2020 to 2030, per Article 4 of the Paris Agreement and UNFCCC decisions 1/CP.21 and 4/CMA.1. By this communication, and consistent with UNFCCC decision 1/CP. 21, paragraph 24, Ghana affirms the nationally determined contribution it put forward in 2015. There is an urgent need for collective, ambitious and meaningful global efforts to keep the global temperature well below two degrees and avoid the irreversible consequences on the climate-vulnerable countries. Ghana is a member of the Africa Union (AU) and holds in high esteem the geopolitical position of Africa in pursuing the agenda 2063.

In updating the nationally determined contribution, Ghana was mindful of the need to:  embrace the AU and align to new policy changes to safeguard the development prospects of the country;

enhance implementation of climate actions by strengthening the mobilisation of public,  increasing the investment credentials and ambition across mitigation, finance and adaptation.

put Ghana's development on an accelerated path for achieving" a resilient and low carbon society by promoting economic growth, climate protection and air quality benefits, youth and women empowerment and social inclusion in the next decade and beyond".

To this end, the revised and enhanced nationally determined contribution reflect aspirations of goal 1, paragraphs 15, 16, 17 and 18 of the AU's agenda 2063.

Foster social inclusion focusing on youth and women Ghana expects that implementing the 19 policy actions will achieve the following by 2030:

Generate absolute greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions of 64 MtCO2e.

Avoid at least 2,900 premature deaths per year from improved air quality.

Benefit cumulatively nearly 38 million people, with the majority being the youth and women.

The 13 adaptation measures are divided into seven unconditional2 and six conditional3 programmes of action. For the 34 mitigation measures, Ghana aims to implement nine unconditional programmes of action that would result in 8.5 MtCO2e GHG reductions by 2025 and a further 24.6 MtCO2e by 2030 compared to the 2020-2030 cumulative emissions in a baseline scenario. Ghana can also adopt additional 25 conditional programmes of action that have the potential to achieve 16.7 MtCO2e by 2025 and 39.4 MtCO2e by 2030 if financial support from the international and private sector is made available to cover the full cost for implementation.

Municipal and District Assemblies (MMDAs), private sector, and civil society organisations can implement. The updated and enhanced nationally determined contribution responds to the sustainability priorities in the following national policy documents:

Ghana @ 100 frameworks and the accompanying national Infrastructure plan.

Coordinated Programme of Economic and Social Development Policy.

2022 to 2025 Medium-Term Development Policy Framework.

Ghana Beyond Aid Charter Strategy Document.

COVID-19 Alleviation and Revitalisation of Enterprises Support opportunities for each of the nationally determined contribution sectors and at the economy-level.

It means that the updated nationally determined contribution must fully respond to government policy needs; be coordinated by capable national institutions, and have access to adequate finance and technology from the international and private sectors.

4.1 Institutional Support for Ghana's Nationally Determined Contribution The Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation (MESTI) coordinates the updated nationally determined contribution process and advocates resource allocation at the scientific evidence. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) will track and report the progress of implementing the nationally determined contribution across the nation and regularly publish progress, achievements, and challenges in the Biennial Transparency Report (BTR) consistent with the UNFCCC Decision 18/CMA.1 on Modalities, Procedures and Guidelines for the Transparency Framework. To this end:

The EPA and MESTI will advocate adopting appropriate carbon pricing measures, including the operationalisation of Article 6 and other international carbon market instruments to support green businesses, create jobs and facilitate technology transfer.

The Ministry of Finance (MOF) will continue to mobilise and track inflows from the Government, development partners, and the private sector to implement nationally determined contributions.

The National Development Planning Commission (NDPC) will continue to facilitate the mainstreaming of the nationally determined contribution into the sector and district plans and annual progress report to monitor the nationally determined contribution. 4.3 Financial Needs for Implementing the Revised Nationally Determined Contribution Ghana requires between US$ 9.3 and US$ 15.5 billion4 of investment to implement the 47 nationally determined contribution measures from 2020 to 2030. US$ 3.9 billion would be required to implement the 16 unconditional programmes of action till 2030. The remaining US$ 5.4 billion for the 31 conditional programmes of action would be mobilised from the public, international, and private sector sources and carbon markets. Ghana will need an additional US$ 3 million biennially to support coordination actions and the regular international reporting of the nationally determined contribution.

4.4 Technology and Capacity Needs for the Revised Nationally Determined Contribution Technology and know-how are a catalyst for implementing the 47 measures to deliver the nationally determined contribution. Ghana will continue to promote rapid technology deployment and support the transfer of suitable emerging technologies to meet the country's needs.

Ghana also plans to integrate capacity development into the overall implementation plan for the nationally determined contribution. Emphasis will be on continuous staff training, deliberate involvement of academic institutions in the training programme, research and evidence gathering to inform the regular update of nationally determined contribution and participation in the global stocktake. Furthermore, Ghana hopes to strengthen the involvement the flow of information from the national to the community levels and vice versa.

Mitigation Outcomes (ITMOs) under the cooperative approaches under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement consistent with UNFCCC Decision 18/CMA.1 paragraph 77 (d).

Ghana will use the established structures for the Climate Ambitious Report Programme (CARP) and Annual Progress Report (APR) as the National Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) backbone to regularly track and report progress and achievement of all the 47 measures. Information from the APR (managed by the National Development Planning Commission), climate data and carbon registry system (hosted by the Environmental Protection Agency) and the CLIMFINTRAC, (managed by the Ministry of Finance) for tracking climate finance will feed into the annual nationally determined contribution progress report for the Ghana Government and the international reports such as National Communication, National Adaptation Communication, Biennial Transparency Report and National Greenhouse Gas Inventory Document.

1. Quantifiable information on the reference point (including, as appropriate, a base year) a. Reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or b. Quantifiable information on the reference indicators, their values in the reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting points (s), and, as The 2019 base year of 58.8 MtCO2e emissions were estimated using the IPCC 2006 Guidelines for National Greenhouse Inventories. There is a possibility of recalculating the 2019 greenhouse gas emission value in 2025 to respond to policy changes and improved data availability. The final value for the 2030 target year would be reported in the National Greenhouse Gas Inventory document covering the period up to 2030.

c. For strategies, plans and actions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement, or policies and information.

d. Target relative to the reference indicator, expressed numerically, for example, in percentage or amount of reduction.

Ghana aims to implement 34 mitigation measures to achieve absolute emission reductions of 64 MtCO2e by 2030. Out of the 34, nine unconditional measures are expected to lead to a 24.6 MtCO2e emission reduction amount. An additional 25 conditional measures can be implemented to further achieve 39.4 MtCO2e if financial support from the international and private sector is made available to cover the full cost for implementation.

e. Information on sources of data used in quantifying the reference point(s).

Data sources for the quantifying information on the base year was based on 2019 greenhouse gas inventory results.

f. Information on the circumstances under which the Party The base year (2019) value would be subjected to recalculations and technical corrections in response to policy changes (to include the effects of Ghana's plans to accelerate the utilisation of extractive resources, development of nuclear energy to support the sustainable industrialisation plan), the best available science and availability of improved data per UNFCCC decision 18/CMA.1 in 2025. Accordingly, information on the base year value updates would be documented and reported in the Biennial Transparency Reports and National inventory documents.

Ghana would be implementing the nationally determined contribution measures over nine years, starting from 2021 and ending in 2030 with a review in 2025 consistent with Article 4.9 and decision 1/CP.21 paragraph 24 to contribute to the Global stocktake as envisaged in Article 14 of the Paris Agreement. The breakdown of the timeframe of implementation is as follows:

b. Whether it is a single-year or multi-year target, as Ghana adopts an absolute single-year target approach, with 2019 being the base year and 2030 as the target year.

b. Sectors, gases, categories and pools covered by the Gases covered: CO2, N2O, CH4, HFCs (CH4 and HFCs are relevant Short-Lived Climate Pollutants - SLCPs). SLCPs and co-emitted air pollutants were included in the mitigation assessment to inform the nationally determined contribution. For SLCPs like methane and HFCs, their reduction in emissions is included in the overall GHG reduction target. For black carbon and other air pollutants (NOx, PM2.5, SO2, organic carbon, VOCs, carbon monoxide), the reduction in these pollutants is not included in the overall GHG reductions but reflected as a co- benefit of the implementation of the nationally determined contribution measures. Some of the measures, including improved cookstoves and electric vehicles, are expected to reduce black carbon emissions for better public health outcomes).

Sectors covered - The expected emission reduction amount constitutes 88% of emissions in the following sectors: Energy, Industrial Processes and Product Use, LULUCF and Waste consistent with 2006 IPCC guidelines. All categories and biomass pools in LULUCF are covered.

Ghana has included all categories of anthropogenic emissions and removals in the nationally determined contribution except emissions from agriculture and selected extractive and manufacturing industries, consistent with the ultimate objective under Article 2 of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, and for the following reasons:

The food production systems are vulnerable (unmechanised and rainfed).

Agriculture is the main source of livelihood support for the rural economy.

Challenges in the agriculture data management system.

Unexplored emission reduction potentials in production systems.  Exclusion of future development in the extractive and manufacturing industry.

Ghana aims to highlight the expected mitigation co-benefits in the nationally determined adaptation actions in the agriculture and health sectors as follows:

Adopting climate-smart agricultural practices is part of the country's agenda to create jobs and promote sustainable land management practices.

Nature-based solutions for promoting eco-tourism as a means for enhancing biodiversity through forest conservation and landscape restoration.

The pursuit of the Green Ghana initiative that incorporates the planting will contribute to the maintenance of the vegetation or landscape and serve as an adaptation measure against the increasing number of extreme weather events in urban areas.

The automation and the use of renewable energy to back the strengthening and full-scale deployment of the disease surveillance system and climate early warning systems as envisaged in all districts are expected to contribute to the mitigative effect of reduction in fossil fuel use for electricity generation.

Ghana's 2020  2025 COVID-19 Alleviation and Revitalisation of Enterprises Support (CARES) is a flagship policy in better building the economy through safeguarding jobs. It is envisaged that the economic gains from the CARES programme would, after 2025, serve as the basis for the Government to continue its economic diversification efforts in the face of the transition towards a resilient and low carbon future.

a. Information on the planning processes that the Party implementation plans, including, as appropriate: The process for updating the nationally determined contribution was government-led, consultative and used the best available national data. The process was divided into planning and formulation, public consultation and gender-responsive manner.

A diagnosis of 2015 nationally determined contribution was made to assess progress and identify and prioritise challenges and investments into implementing the programmes in the nationally determined contribution. The findings from the comprehensive gender analysis also informed the revision of the nationally determined contribution. The Whole-Ghana-Approach (WoGA) strategy was employed to consult all the relevant stakeholders6 during the update process to ensure the buy-in of the relevant stakeholders. The findings from the diagnostics, the consultations and the need to respond to new government priorities; strengthen the implementation of the nationally determined contribution; boost private sector interest, the analytical work that ensued culminated in completing the information required in Annex 1 of Decision 4/CMA.1 Information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding of Ghana's revised and enhanced nationally determined contribution. The draft revised nationally determined contribution. A background paper on the socio- economic and political implications was used for high-level engagement and political endorsement. Following cabinet approval, the updated nationally determined contribution was officially published and transmitted to the UNFCCC.

Civil Society (CSO) Platform on Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) appropriate:

Ghana, located in West Africa, has a total land area of 239,460 km2. Ghana is a democratic nation with power shared among the Executive, Legislature and Judiciary. Ghana's climate is tropical and strongly influenced by the West Africa monsoon winds. The climate is generally warm, with variable temperatures masked by seasons and topography. The northern part of the country typically records one rainy season, which begins in May and lasts until September. Southern Ghana records two rainy seasons from April to July and from September to November. The different rainfall patterns present different climate change vulnerabilities to the northern and southern divides of the country.

Ghana's 2020 population is estimated at 30.9 million and represents a 26% increase over 2010 levels of 24.6 million at an annual growth rate of 2.3%. Under a tenth (8.2%) of the population live in extreme poverty, outstandingly high in rural Savannah at 36.1%. Poverty and livelihoods, gender and geographic locations determine the level of climate change vulnerabilities in the country. In the last 30 years, the economy expanded more than four times, consequently halving poverty to 23% by 2016 78. Ghana's sustained economic growth has been influenced by the inflows of proceeds from commodity exports (gold, cocoa, timber, and recently crude oil). In 2019, out of US$22 billion international trade value, gold accounted for 50%, followed by crude oil (22%), cocoa (11%) and other merchantable (17%)9. On the other hand, the cost of environmental degradation was valued at approximately US$ 6.3 billion (World Bank, 2020).

Much of the rural livelihoods depend on a natural resource base. Statistics show that 71% of rural people are employed in agriculture, forestry, and fishing (World Bank, 2020).

The devastating effects of COVID-19 made the economy grow by only 1.1% in 2020, a 6.5% shortfall before the pandemic. Besides COVID-19, Ghana is saddled with development challenges associated with high employment, urbanisation, and illegal mining. Climate change presents an additional long- term development risk that Ghana is addressing in the tight fiscal constraints. Despite the economic challenges, climate change remains a priority in Ghana. That is why its recent national development policy outlines climate change as a priority area for action. The commitment to tackle climate on all fronts has been shown in this nationally determined contribution's high ambition climate actions.

b. Specific information applicable to Parties, including regional economic integration organisations and their member States, that have reached an agreement to act jointly and the terms of the agreement, in accordance c. How the Party's preparation of its nationally determined contribution has been informed by the outcomes of the paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreement;

Not applicable since the first global stocktake has not taken place yet d. Each Party with a nationally determined contribution under Article 4 of the Paris Agreement that consists of adaptation action and/or economic diversification plans resulting in mitigation co-benefits consistent with Article information on:

ii. Specific projects, measures and activities to be and fisheries.

The figures from Ghana's greenhouse gas inventories were the main input for the accounting. The accounting methodologies for the nationally determined contribution are consistent with UNFCCC decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 31, and UNFCCC decision 4/CMA.1. The accounting approaches and the assumptions for accounting for the nationally determined contribution have been provided in this document and will be reported in the Biennial Transparency Reports (BTRs) under the Paris Agreement, consistent with UNFCCC decisions 4/CMA.1 and determined contribution;

c. If applicable, information on how the Party will take appropriate;

Refer to 5d below.

d. IPCC methodologies and metrics used for estimating removals;

Ghana used 2006 IPCC guidelines for estimating the anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals in 2019. In accounting for the nationally determined contribution, Ghana intends to use the IPCC 2006 guidelines, the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC guidelines or any future updated IPCC guidelines that the CMA may agree upon.

Ghana will continue to use 100-year global warming potential from the AR4 or consider using the latest metric that the CMA may agree upon for estimating anthropogenic emissions and removals.

e. Sector-, category- or activity-specific assumptions, guidance, as appropriate, including, as applicable:

Ghana will address emissions and subsequent removals from natural disturbances due to forest fires on managed forest lands in accounting for its nationally determined contribution. Similar accounting approaches for natural disturbances due to forest fires will be consistently applied to the base year (2019) and target year (2030). The associated emissions/removals from natural disturbances due to forest fires would be included in the national greenhouse inventory estimates consistent with IPCC 2006 guidelines and any subsequent version or refinement, as applicable, as well as Annex II to Decision 4/CMA1. For non-forest land, there will be no provisions for natural disturbances.

Harvested wood products are not accounted for. However, Ghana may report on the emissions/removals from Harvested wood products using a production approach defined in the IPCC Guidelines (mainly wood for export) in future.

The effects of the age-class structure in forests are not addressed.

(i) How the reference indicators, baseline(s) and/or methodologies, data sources and models used; Ghana's base year emissions for 2019 is from the latest national greenhouse inventory using the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. The 2019 net emissions include Energy, IPPU, Agriculture and LULUCF, and Waste sectors using a mix of tiers 1, 2 and 3 approaches. Tier 1 methodology was used to estimate greenhouse emissions for all the activities in the Energy and Agriculture sectors. For the IPPU sector, the tier 1 approach was applied to estimate emissions for all the categories except the metal industry, where tier 2 methodology was used to estimate emissions from aluminium production in the Volta Aluminium Company (VALCO). In the Waste sector, tier 2 was used to estimate emissions from the solid waste disposal category, while tier 1 was applied to the rest of the categories. In the LULUCF sector, tier 3 methodology was used to estimate the net greenhouse gas emissions from the forestland, cropland, and grassland. Tier 2 was used for wetlands, settlements, and other lands. In the LULUCF sector, all areas are considered as part of managed lands.

Refer to Ghana's Fourth National Greenhouse Gas Inventory Report for comprehensive information on assumptions, methodologies, data sources for the greenhouse emissions for the base year (2019). Furthermore, Ghana used the Greenhouse Gas Abatement Cost Model (GACMO) and Low Emissions Analysis Platform (LEAP Model) to calculate the emission reductions for individual mitigation measures and aggregated the emission reductions into sectoral and national targets.

Some of the assumptions in the GACMO and LEAP model relate to macro- economic indicators (GDP sector-value addition trends, incomes), demographic indicators (changing in size and number of households in urban and rural), technology penetration, existing and planned policies, financial indicators (energy and electricity prices, currency exchanges, discount rates) and CDM approved methodologies.

The reduction in emissions of SLCPs (including black carbon in the form of PM2.5) and co-emitted air pollutants (organic carbon, NOx, VOCs, and CO) was included in the GHG mitigation assessment to inform the nationally determined contribution, to quantify the co-benefits for SLCP and air pollutant emission reductions, due to the additional climate, air pollution and health benefits that can be achieved simultaneously to GHG emission reductions.

The LEAP tool was used for this assessment, as described for GHGs in Section 5. f(i). Emission factors for SLCPs and air pollutants were integrated into the GHG mitigation assessment in LEAP from international emission inventory databases (EMEP/EEA 2019 air pollutant emission inventory guidebook). The full implementation of the NDC was estimated to reduce national total BC, PM2.5, OC, NOx, VOC, and CO emissions by 31%, 36%, 39%, 5%, 28%, and 30% in 2030 compared to a baseline scenario.

Not Applicable. Ghana's nationally determined contribution includes only climate forcers included in the IPCC guidelines as indicated in section 3b.

(iv) Further technical information, as necessary; Not Applicable Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, if applicable.

Ghana intends to use voluntary cooperation under Article 6.2 of the Paris Agreement to achieve up to 55% (which is about 24 million tonnes of emission reductions) of its conditional absolute emission reductions. Accounting and reporting for emissions reductions emanating from the voluntary cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement would be consistent with the guidance adopted by CMA1 and any further guidance agreed by the CMA.

To demonstrate its firm commitment to the collective global efforts toward achieving the long-term temperature goal, Ghana has considerably increased the ambition of its updated nationally determined contribution. Ghana's updated nationally determined contribution represents a reasonable share of the global effort to tackle climate change. Thus, Ghana considers its updated nationally determined contribution to be fair and ambitious for the following reasons:  As a developing and climate-vulnerable country, Ghana has prioritised addressing its developmental and public health challenges resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Despite these challenges, the country is still making significant efforts to address climate change head-on amid the tight fiscal space.

Ghana undertakes a formal emission reduction obligation to control the growth of its GHG emissions, despite having emitted 0.1% of global GHG emissions in 201810.

Added new programmes of actions in relevant sectors, revised target upwards, included new greenhouse and short-lived climate pollutants and linked the nationally determined contribution to the Government efforts to achieving the medium-long-term low emission development goals.

c. How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 3, d. How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 4, e. How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 6, Ghana views its updated and enhanced nationally determined contribution to be in line with the objective of the UNFCCC and the long-term goal of the UNFCCC Paris Agreement, as explained in 6a and 6b.

6.2 Annexe 2: Adaptation and Mitigation Contribution Table11 gender-related health risks.

(RAC).

Industry.

Low carbon electricity generation. Mitigation Sustainable Energy based cleaner cooking solutions.

