Indias Updated First Nationally Determined Contribution Under Pursuant to decision 1/CP.20, India submitted its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) on 2nd October, 2015. In accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 22, Indias Intended NDC is now its first NDC under the Paris Agreement.

The Article 4, paragraph 9 of the Paris Agreement provides that each Party shall communicate a nationally determined contribution every five years in accordance with decision 1/CP.21. Decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 23 and 24, requests Parties to Article 4, paragraph 9, of the Agreement.

Therefore, in accordance with the aforesaid provision of the Paris Agreement read with relevant decisions, India hereby communicates an update to its first NDC submitted earlier on October 2, 2015, for the period up to 2030, as under: 1. To put forward and further propagate a healthy and sustainable way of living based on traditions and values of conservation and moderation, including through a mass movement for LIFE Lifestyle for Environment as a key to combating climate change [ UPDATED]. 2. To adopt a climate friendly and a cleaner path than the one followed hitherto by others at corresponding level of economic development.

3. To reduce Emissions Intensity of its GDP by 45 percent by 2030, from 2005 level [UPDATED].

4. To achieve about 50 percent cumulative electric power installed capacity from non-fossil fuel-based energy resources by 2030, with the help of transfer of technology and low-cost international finance including from Green Climate Fund (GCF) [UPDATED].

5. To create an additional carbon sink of 2.5 to 3 billion tonnes of CO2 equivalent through additional forest and tree cover by 2030.

6. To better adapt to climate change by enhancing investments in development programmes in sectors vulnerable to climate change, particularly agriculture, water resources, Himalayan region, coastal regions, health and disaster management.

7. To mobilize domestic and new & additional funds from developed countries to implement the above mitigation and adaptation actions in view of the resource required and the resource gap.

8. To build capacities, create domestic framework and international architecture for quick diffusion of cutting edge climate technology in India and for joint collaborative R&D for such future technologies.

India reaffirms its commitment to the UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.

This update to Indias existing NDC is a step forward towards our long term goal of reaching net-zero by 2070.

No change in the other sections or text or otherwise of the document containing existing first NDC is proposed at this stage. India reserves the right to provide further updates by way of additional submissions on its NDC, as and when required.

