The document index:

National circumstances of the state of Kuwait 5 Effects of climate change on the State of Kuwait 5 The projects of avoiding the increasing of emissions 9 Adapting with the adverse effects of climate change 10 The process of planning and implementation 13 Annex: Information to facilitate clarity, transparency The State of Kuwait has updated the document of the Nationally Determined Contributions and submitted it to the secretariat of the Convention to share worldwide: the process of combating climate change based on sustainable development plans and programs at the national level for the period from 2015 to 2035.

Based on the principles of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the provisions of the Paris Agreement and the Sustainable Development Goals (Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development), the State of Kuwait seeks to transition to a low-emissions carbon-equivalent economic system based on its future business in the principles of a circular economy of carbon in addition to legislation and laws in the areas of mitigation and adaptation Climate change based on the expectations of its future emissions according to business as usual patterns for the period between 2015-2035. In this period, the State of Kuwait has been seeking to avoid emitting the equivalent of 7.4% of its total emissions in 2035 with unconditional national efforts. Moreover, this percentage of emissions reduction represents the countrys maximum ambition which the country of Kuwait had based on national conditions and economic, political, social and health developments during the Corona pandemic during the years 2020 and 2021 and the resulting stagnation of the global economy, and the states efforts to pandemic the virus on the other.

The objective:

Introduction:

Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change; it joined the Convention on 28 Dec.1994 and entered into force on 28 Mar. 1995, and the state of Kuwait ratified Kyoto Protocol under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change on 11 Mar. 2005 and entered into force on 9 Jun. 2005. The State of Kuwait shares the concerns of the international community in limiting the negative impacts of climate change, it recognizes that the global nature of climate change calls for maximum cooperation and participation in an effective international response in implementing the terms of the United Nations Framework Convention on climate change (UNFCCC) from all countries of the world in accordance with common but differentiated responsibilities as stated in Article 4 paragraph 1 , which says: All Parties, taking into account their common but differentiated responsibilities and their The State of Kuwait also signed the Paris Climate Agreement on 4/22/2016 and submitted its first contribution document at the national level after ratification on 4/23/2018 based on the information, results and analyses contained in the first national communication document submitted by the state in 2012. Moreover, based on the latest documents submitted by the State of Kuwait to the Secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change recently, where the second national communication (SNC) was submitted in July 2019, and the document of the first Biennial update report (BUR) was submitted in September 2019, in addition to the National Adaptation Plan (NAP) in February 2021 Therefore, the State of Kuwait has updated the first national contributions document based on the latest information contained in these documents related to the inventory of emissions and ways to adapt to the negative effects of climate change on the state's sectors.

First: national circumstances of the state of Kuwait:

Kuwait is located in the Northeast of the Middle East and North Africa between latitudes 28o 30" and 30o 5" and longitudes 46o 33" and 48o 30" in the east. The total area of Kuwait is 17,818 km2, including the nine unpopulated islands in the Arabian Gulf region. Kuwait's Government is which is developing rules that controls legislative, executive, and judicial authorities.

(1) Effects of climate change on the State of Kuwait:

The State of Kuwait is a tropical dry and subtropical desert with an extremely arid climate. Its annual precipitation ranges between 75 and 150 mm, but the actual precipitation is 600 mm per year. There are large and noticeable differences in temperature between summer and winter in Kuwait. In summer, the temperature can reach 48 degrees Celsius and an average of 44 degrees Celsius, and on July 21, 2016, the temperature reached its highest level ever, as the temperature reached 54 degrees Celsius in the north of the State of Kuwait, and it is worth noting that it was the highest temperature recorded throughout history in the Eastern Hemisphere and Asia, according to the World Meteorological Organization report issued in June 2019.

Due to its relatively northern location in the Gulf region, the northern winds blowing from Iran and Iraq ensure that the temperature of Kuwait is lower than that of other Arab Gulf states. Precipitation occurs mostly from October to April.

During the summer, which is much longer than the winter, violent northwest dust storms dominate most weather events during the months of March through April, and in the later months of hot summer, between May and September, sandstorms are more likely, and southeast winds blow during the period From September to October from the Arabian Gulf, hence the humidity during these months (Second National Communication, 2019). By the end of October, the cycle of winter and summer begins again, as the temperature drops to -6C during the night. The daytime is usually characterized by higher temperatures ranging from 10 to 17 degrees Celsius.

According to its climate, the State of Kuwait suffers the lack of fresh water, with an annual precipitation ranges between 75 and 150 mm, which is low Kuwait relies entirely on sea water desalination process to obtain fresh water where is 93% from the water supply comes from the desalination of sea water, while the remaining percentage comes from non-generated groundwater due to scarcity of rainfall. However, the seawater desalination process consumes high energy with an adverse impact on marine and coastal ecosystems. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Due to the nature of the low-lying coastal of Kuwait, it is at risk to sea levels rise associated with 1.4 -3% of its coastal territory, which affects 5% of its GDP.

Kuwaits population reached 4411124 in 2016 with a steady increase over the past two decades by growth rate around 4.1%. The expected increase in population growth rate is combined with urban development and rapid prices, the State of Kuwait is facing many developmental challenges, including diversifying, and enhancing work opportunities that provides safe working environments for citizens and residents, urban planning and housing, infrastructure and promoting national capacities to monitor and implement developmental plans.

Figure 1: Average annual temperature and precipitation It is worth mentioning that the state of Kuwait is considered a country with a general budgets. Thus, the state's economy is vulnerable to oil prices fluctuations in supply and demand, and Kuwait's industrial base is based on the extraction, refining, and exporting of oil with an export revenue of more than 90% of the country total revenues, the value of the oil contribution to GDP represents 51-55%. Also, Kuwait is entirely dependent on fossil fuels for energy production by 83.5% of liquid oil and 16.5% of natural gas.

The energy sector is one of the largest emitters of greenhouse gases, with energy-related greenhouse gas emissions in 2016 broken down by activity. Emissions from the production of electricity and desalinated water are mainly related to the combustion of natural gas, and petroleum products showed the gas emissions, about 58 percent.

(1) avoiding of greenhouse gas emissions:

The State of Kuwait is ambitious to move to a low carbon equivalent economy and to avoid the increase in greenhouse gas emissions compared to business as usual patterns, based on plans and development projects in the country for the period from 2015 to 2035, the state of Kuwait is seeking to achieve this objective on a voluntary basis by implementing some projects and enacting laws and legislation in the areas of mitigation and adapting to the adverse effect of climate change, which are mutually beneficial to mitigation. According to their national economic circumstances, and the state of Kuwait therefore seeks to avoid emission of greenhouse gases equivalent to 7.4% of its total future emission on 2035 through its national efforts. The State of Kuwait also hopes that financial technical and technological support will be provided through the mechanisms of the convention in particular market, non- market mechanisms, and cooperative approach under article 6 of the Paris Agreement, to ensure the sustainability of future projects and to achieve greater benefit for emission reduction to implement future contribution.

Figure 3: Distribution of greenhouse gas emissions (1.1) The projects of avoiding the increasing of emissions: The State of Kuwait seeks to avoid increasing greenhouse gases emissions from 2015 to 2035 based on business-as-usual patterns (BAU), by adopting the circular carbon economy principle in development projects and plans among the sectors most contributing to greenhouse gas emissions, the energy of 142290750 tons in 2035 and these projects are:

Decarbonization Cultivating of Mangroves 2018 Percentage of total state emission in 2035 7.4% (2) Adapting with the adverse effects of climate change: The state of Kuwait seeks to move to a low-carbon economic system that is adoptable to the adverse effects of climate change to promote and protect its natural resources and achieve sustainable development standards, and it seeks to adapt to the effects of climate change from rising temperatures, scarce storms and their impact on the economic, social and health sector.

(2.2) Adaptation projects:

Fisheries sector:

The Environment Public Authority has established the electronic environmental control information system for the protection of marine life.

Establishment of a regional database and information center to support fisheries management (Food and Agriculture Organization UN/ The Public Authority of Agriculture Affairs and Fish Resources)  Creation of terrestrial and marine nature resources (EPA) Water resources Sector:

Development and implementation of water resources programs / Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research.

Building desalination plants.

Rationalization of water consumption using modern techniques.  Definitions of collected water and water conservation.  Assessment of the technical needs of water resources.  Using wastewater that comes from wastewater processing stations.

Coastal line Sector:

Establishment of the electronic environmental control information system for marine life in the state of Kuwait (EPA).

Establishment of the costal information system.

Common Alerting Protocol (Meteoritical Public Administration) Third: Legislation and Laws:

1-Emission limitation legislation and laws:

The State of Kuwait has initiated formal producers to study the law of removal of subsidies for gasoline from the beginning of 2016 and gradual removal of subsidies for electricity and water in commercial and industrial sectors, and this contributes significantly to rationalization of greenhouse gas emission. The Kuwaiti National Assembly also adopted Environmental protection act no.42 of 2014, as amended by act no.99 of 2015, the aim of this act is to protect the environment and all its sources, controlling pollution, developing the natural resources, protecting the society and the human health and all biological diversity, penalties and environmental damages amends, and any related general law.

The Environmental Protection Law 42/2014 deals directly and indirectly with the energy sector. Article (122) and (123) of the Environmental Protection Law stated the necessity of using energy-saving systems in the new state do not match with energy saving specification.

The Environmental Protection Law in Article (111) urged the relevant state authorities to develop environmental strategies, plans and work programs related to the scope of their work.

The articles of the law show the states interest and direction in reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the energy sector by seeking to improve energy consumption management by establishing systems and rules for the efficiency of the devices used and the efficiency of energy consumption in buildings (building materials and design, air conditioning systems and lighting, etc.). The environmental law also paves the way for the development, adoption, and implementation of a national strategy to reduce the states consumption of energy and diversify energy sources, especially increasing the percentage of the State of Kuwait, where His Highness announced the State of Kuwaits endeavor to increase its energy needs from renewable energy sources by 2030.

2- Legislation and laws adapting to the negative effects of climate changes:

The Environmental Protection Law No. 42 of 2014 and its amendments accorded paramount importance in some of its articles to issues related to using and consuming natural resources in the field of protecting the land. Articles (40) and (41) of the law discussed regulating the camping process and land use in grazing or any other activities that may harm the soil, which contributes to reducing the phenomenon of desertification and soil natural reserves to maintain biodiversity. Regarding water resources management Articles (88) and (89) have set the foundations to develop a program for water management in the country and the standards, regulations for water conservation to adapt to the scarcity of water resources in the of the country articles (66) and (99) of the Law are dedicated for the marine environment and the need to create a national network for monitoring and regulating the marine environment and conducting studies to monitor sea level rise. Considering that the State of Kuwait suffers from numerous crises and natural disasters such as sand and dust storms and flash floods waves, the law established Article (118), which states the needs to prepare emergency plans and crises and natural disasters management plans.

Regarding food security, the state has issued laws related to entirely prevent fishing in Kuwaits bay to maintain biodiversity and fish stocks. Furthermore, there are laws specialized in banning fishing of some species of fish and shrimp in the territorial waters and allows it only in specified seasons to prevent the depletion of fish stocks.

The legislator also seeks through the Environment Protection Law No. 42/2014, as amended some of its provisions in Law No. 99/2015 to promote environmental culture in Kuwait society and spread information relating to the environment for public to change some the behavioral patterns among the resources sustainability and the proper usage of it.

Fourth: The process of planning and implementation:

For the state of Kuwait to be able to implement the procedures of mitigating greenhouse gas emissions and adapting to climate change impacts and achieve sustainable development criteria, Kuwait needs the availability of committees and mechanisms included in the framework agreement such as technological mechanisms consisting of the Technology Executive Committee (TEC) and the Climate Technology Centre & Network (CTCN), as well as the Green Climate Fund (GCF). In accordance with provisions of Article (4.7) of the Framework Convention which states that the extent to which the developing countries fulfill its obligations under the Convention will depend on the developed partys providence of support to developing parties in the field of finance, technology transfer, to ensure an effective global cooperative action on climate change.

The State of Kuwait will start preparing a low-emissions development strategy 2050 in accordance with the requirements of the Paris climate agreement, based on the principle of a circular carbon economy. And the state of Kuwait seeks to combine the outputs of this strategy with the new developing plans by endorsing new projects to serve the Kuwait vision 2035 until 2050.

Fifth: fairness and ambition:

Therefore, the State of Kuwait is keen on increasing its capacity in dealing with issues related to climate change simultaneously with its efforts in adapting with the negative impacts of this phenomenon and its consequences on the social and economic aspects.

Although it did not participate in causing this phenomenon, the geographical location of the State of Kuwait made it vulnerable to the effects of climate change, which appeared to be very apparent in recent years through a and dust storms that cause life in the country to stop and damage the public health of citizens. And residents, which contributes to increasing losses and affecting 5% of its GDP.

The State of Kuwait will suffer from economic and social consequences of negative impacts of response measures, where Kuwait is considered one of from international policies and procedures of the UNFCCC. The Secretariat of OPEC as well as many international consultancy entities have prepared on fossil fuel sectors, particularly oil and oil products.

Given the national circumstances of the state of Kuwait, which is currently facing numerous economic, social, and environmental challenges because of the outbreak of the corona pandemic during the past two years in addition to the growing population and the increasing demand of resources, particularly water and energy, which is accompanied with the decline in the national income because of mitigation policies of developed countries. Also taking into consideration the state's responsibility to provide employment opportunities, housing and to maintain the citizen's living standard, the contribution of the State of Kuwait determined at the national level to avoid the equivalent of 7.4% of its emissions on 2035 is considered very ambitious and fair.

Sixth: General observations and assumptions:

The State of Kuwait provided an update of its Nationally Determined Contributions for the period from 2015 to 2035, as information was extracted from the latest documents submitted by the State of Kuwait to the Secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, represented in the second national communication (SNC) July 2019, the first Biennial update report (BUR) September 2019, and the national Adaptation plan (NAP) February 2021.

The update of the first contribution document has been prepared based on the development projects and plans of the country and based on the principle of the circular carbon economy, which achieves cooperation between the government sector and the private sector in the country. The State of Kuwait is also counting on market, non-market mechanisms and cooperative Approach within Article six of the Paris Agreement to achieve greater ambition in reducing greenhouse gas emissions and including them in the upcoming national contributions, in addition to the means of implementation (financial and technical support and capacity building).

Kuwait reserves the right to reconsider this document based on future developments related to national conditions and the states general policy, or parties are amended in a manner that includes rules or provisions that differ with the assumptions under which this document was presented.

Annex: Information to facilitate clarity, transparency and Usual Emissions Projection.

142,290,750MTCO2e.

Not applicable.

2. Time frames and/or periods for implementation decision adopted by the CMA;

Single-year target in 2035.

a. General description of the target; Kuwait's economic target to reduce 7.4% the primary emission source.

Sectors:

2035 Carbon Control Target Plan Gases:

Carbon Dioxide (CO2).

Methane (CH4).

Nitrous Oxide (N2O).

Agreement;

Agreement;

Paris Agreement to submit information on:

Kuwait is considered one of the countries that policies and procedures of the UNFCCC. accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and, as appropriate, removals:

CO2 equivalents.

Not applicable. There is no forest in the State of Kuwait.

Land was -13.190 GgCo2e in 2016.

Agreement, if applicable.

Furthermore, article 6 of the Paris Agreement efficient emission reductions, facilitate the transfer of carbon mitigation technology, and benefits.

Convention.

Agreement;

Not applicable.

Not applicable.

Convention as set out in its Article 2; Kuwait considers the Paris Agreement to be in Convention as set out in its Article2. Kuwaits goal. See 6(a) and 6(b) for more information.

The State of Kuwait attaches great importance capabilities in dealing with issues related to efforts to adapt with the negative effects of 6(b) for more information.

