Annex I: Information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding (ICTU) of Lebanons Executive Summary Amid the significant gap between the aggregate effect of greenhouse gas emission reductions announced in the 2015 Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) and the emissions pathway consistent with the Paris Agreement goal, the global call for ambition should be met with an increase in climate action efforts. Moreover, the IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways clearly calls for stronger mitigation measures, as well as enhanced resilience, in order to avoid catastrophic climate changes. The Republic of Lebanon is submitting an update to its 2015 Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) in accordance with Article 4.9 of the Paris Agreement (and Law 115/2019) to respond to this call for enhancement and to meet the goals of the Agreement. Lebanon firmly believes in combatting the climate crisis by adopting a pathway towards sustainable development. This update comes at a time when Lebanon is facing economic, financial, monetary, and banking crises which significantly impact economic output, livelihoods, and development. Several reforms packages are under development to bring Lebanon unto a more sustainable and positive development path. Lebanon will need international support to successfully overcome the economic downturn, and to sustainably rebuild its economy and the resilience of its society. Despite its hardships, Lebanon remains committed to fighting the climate crisis. This will entail policy and fiscal reforms to enable the improvement of the energy and transport sectors through energy efficiency, the sustainable use of Lebanons land and water resources, the reduction of polluting practices in agriculture, waste, and industry, and enhancing the resilience of communities and infrastructure. These solutions go in tandem with Lebanons economic recovery and would increase revenue to the government, which are crucial steps to emerge from the current crisis. This NDC update is therefore aligned with the economic recovery effort and while providing complementary sustainable solutions to Lebanons challenges. Moreover, Lebanon prioritizes the consideration of the socio-economic status of the most vulnerable through a gender lens. Finally, this NDC will be achieved only if all national stakeholders (including non- state actors such as municipalities) cooperate and the international community supports Lebanon during these difficult times. The most notable updates of this 2020 NDC are:

Lebanon commits to unconditionally increase its greenhouse gas emission reduction target relative to the Business-as-Usual (BAU) scenario from 15% to 20%, and conditionally increasing its GHG emission reduction target relative to the BAU scenario from 30% to 31%. Lebanon commits to unconditionally generate 18% of its power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 11% of its heat demand (in the building sector) from renewable energy sources in 2030, compared to a combined 15% in 2015. Moreover, Lebanon conditionally commits to generate 30% of its power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 16.5% of its heat demand (in the building sector) from renewable energy sources in 2030, compared to a combined 20% in 2015. This NDC provides additional information on the mitigation targets through the guidance on Information to provide Clarity, Transparency and Understanding (ICTU) in Decision 4/CMA.1.

Enhance synchronization Lebanons NDC targets and implementation are synchronized with the conventions to maximize efficiency and partnerships.

The importance of a whole-of-society approach has been considered in this NDC by prioritizing vulnerable groups in climate action.

The reinstatement, as soon as possible, of the prevailing national circumstances prior to the latest regional crisis, a matter considered as Lebanons legitimate right;

The absence of the emergence of any new crisis which could adversely affect Lebanons national circumstances.

Lebanon is experiencing a multi-faceted crisis, which will only worsen with climatic impacts. Therefore, Lebanons priority for the next decade is to spur sustainable growth through the creation of decent jobs and improve the well-being of its population through welfare programmes and protection of natural resources. Consequently, the implementation of this NDC consists of inherent components in Lebanons economic recovery path, while reaffirming Lebanons commitment to the climate fight. It is under these circumstances, and in accordance with Article 4.9 of the Paris Agreement and Law 115/2019, that Lebanon presents its updated 2020 NDC, which can only be achieved through the cooperation of all national stakeholders and the invaluable support of the international community during these difficult times.

2. Climate Action for Sustainable Development and a Green Economy Lebanons roadmap to macroeconomic stability amid the number of challenges it is facing will need to be green, inclusive, and conform with the leave no one behind principle. The aim is to drive sustainable, low- emission growth, as well as increase the resilience of the economy, communities and ecosystems to sustain any future shocks, including climate events. The government has put forth several plans and reforms agendas to attract foreign investments and aid to put the country on a long-term sustainable growth trajectory, including the CEDRE-CIP (Conference Economique pour le Dveloppement par les Reformes avec les Entreprises  Capital Investment Program)2, the Lebanon Economic Vision (LEV)3 and the Government Financial Recovery Plan4. Moreover, several ministerial strategies are shifting their missions by reiterating the priority to drive sustainable economic growth. Moreover, a climate-proofing analysis of the above plans has been conducted to secure harmonization with the Paris Agreement mandate. This NDC update is synchronized with these plans and reforms and most of the proposed courses of action are already stated in endorsed ministerial strategies and plans, which together form Lebanons international commitment. Lebanons NDC, in addition to reducing national greenhouse gas emissions, will also improve air quality, enhance food security, reduce poverty and vulnerability, create job opportunities, protect the environment and green cities, and improve social welfare and boost economic growth. Moreover, in the energy sector it will increase its robustness, security, reliability, sustainability and independence, which will reduce the burden on the government budget and alleviate the fiscal deficit. Furthermore, climate action enables the move to a green and blue economy by removing barriers to clean investments and solidifying demand for greener products and services through sound economic incentives and regulation. Moving towards a green economy in Lebanon satisfies the concept of sustainable development since it aims for high human development, with a reduced ecological impact. Lebanons draft Low Emission Development Strategys (LEDS) objectives are in line with this principle, by visualizing a circular economy, enhanced research and development, and decoupled economic growth and GHG emissions. This NDC is a steppingstone to achieving the LEDS objectives in 2050. Lebanon prioritizes a just transition through the consideration of the socio-economic status of the most vulnerable, adopting a gender-responsive approach. This is in line with the Government of Lebanons adherence to the Secretary-Generals 2019 Climate Action Summit declaration on Social and Political drivers, which aims at ensuring that the economic, environmental and social aspects of the transformation of economies and societies towards greater sustainability are managed in ways that maximize opportunities of decent work for all, reduce inequalities, promote social justice, and enhance countrys efforts to improve the peoples health.

3. Climate Action Enablers Measures for sustainable development and climate action are most effective if based on robust governance mechanisms, regulations and partnerships. Lebanon therefore views these elements as Climate Action Enablers which are crucial to sustained and more ambitious actions to achieve the NDC. Moreover, these enablers contribute to the achievement of numerous Sustainable Development Goals, including SDGs 16 (Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions) and 17 (Partnerships for the Goals). Several enablers below are already underway, and others have been prioritized for implementation.

CAE1: Improved Governance and Institutional Capacities Lebanon prioritizes climate governance as the enabling of institutions to plan, prepare and react to climate change. Building the needed institutional capacities to reform, analyze, coordinate and regulate climate and sustainable development action is essential. This is particularly important for climate policy coherence, efficiency, integration and mainstreaming, which are the building blocks of effective and informed green reforms.

CAE4: Innovative Research and Development Encouraged Lebanon aims to reduce the carbon intensity of its economy through stimulating Research and Development for low carbon and sustainable technologies. In addition, Lebanon needs to improve its scientific aptitude to better guide decision-making. It is therefore important to foster an innovative environment by sustainably enhancing the capabilities of the private sector, driving large public investments for research and piloting, partnering with academic bodies to provide the needed readiness for transformational change, and encouraging innovation labs.

CAE5: Comprehensive Integration Integrated solutions to the climate crisis, as well as economic recovery, cannot be performed without the effective inclusion of gender institutions, youth groups and vulnerable communities. Lebanon plans to revise its policy- making process to include these groups which are key to the success of the NDC and are the most impacted by climate impacts.

CAE6: Enhanced Monitoring and Transparency Clarity and effectiveness of action can only be guaranteed through a robust monitoring and transparency framework, tackling climate and sustainable development action, as well as support. In order to enhance the impacts of policymaking, and to successfully participate in tracking the global progress of the climate fight, a transparency framework will be established to improve institutional arrangements, data availability and periodicity, as well as monitoring and evaluation of mitigation and adaptation projects.

4. Mitigation Contribution Lebanon is updating the mitigation targets included in its 2015 Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) in accordance with paragraphs 9 of Article 4 of the Paris Agreement and Law 115/2019, paragraph 24 of Decision 1/CP.21 and paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 of Decision 1/CMA.2, to respond to the urgent global call for enhanced ambition in order to meet the Paris Agreements goals, considering Common but Differentiated Responsibilities (CBDR) in light of national circumstances, and in line with the Secretary-Generals Climate Action Summit declaration on Mitigation Strategy, which Lebanon joined in 2019. This NDC represents a progression beyond Lebanons 2015 NDC by unconditionally increasing its Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emission target relative to the Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario from 15% to 20%, and conditionally increasing its GHG emission target relative to the BAU scenario from 30% to 31%. Moreover, Lebanon commits to unconditionally generate 18% of the power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 11% of its heat demand (in the building sector) from renewable energy sources in 2030, compared to a combined 15% in 2015. Conditionally, Lebanon commits to generate 30% of the power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 16.5% of its heat demand (in the building sector) from renewable energy sources in 2030, compared to a combined 20% in 2015 (guided by the IRENA Renewable Energy Outlook: Lebanon6). Lebanon believes that enhanced climate ambition is needed from all countries despite climate vulnerability, as increased mitigation leads to a decrease in adaptation needs. The NDC GHG targets have been methodologically updated to reflect the national GHG inventory with the use of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines and the 100-year time-horizon GWP values from the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report. Most of the proposed courses of action to implement the mitigation NDC are already alluded to in endorsed ministerial strategies and plans, as well as reports, such as the Policy Paper for Electricity sector (PPES) 2019, the 2020 National Water Sector Strategy (NWSS), the 2020 Ministry of Agriculture Strategy, the Oil and Gas Strategic Environmental Assessment, and the 2020 IRENA Renewable Energy Outlook: Lebanon, the National Cooling Plan (NCP), among others, which together form Lebanons international commitment. Lebanons GHG target is economy-wide, and includes mitigation efforts from the energy, transport, forestry, agriculture, waste and industrial sectors to achieve its NDC. Moreover, almost all planned mitigation actions have sustainable development co-benefits. The implementation of the above-mentioned Climate Action Enablers is crucial to the achievement of the targets put forward in this update.

(amounting to 7,790 Gg. CO2eq.).

(amounting to 11,860 Gg. CO2eq.).

(amounting to 12,075 Gg. CO2eq.).

Lebanon will track progress and achievement of the unconditional and conditional targets listed above in its first Biennial Transparency Report (BTR) and onwards, contingent on adequate support. Additional information on the mitigation targets is provided in the Annex to this submission. Lebanon has used the guidance on Information to provide Clarity, Transparency and Understanding (ICTU) in Decision 4/CMA.1.

7 GHG emission reductions recalculated as per the 2006 IPCC Guidelines and AR5 GWPs. Numbers reflect rounding. 8 The unconditional mitigation scenario includes the impacts of mitigation actions which Lebanon can nationally implement, and through international support in the form of loans or other repayable instruments. 9 The conditional mitigation scenario covers the mitigation actions under the unconditional scenario, as well as further mitigation actions which can be implemented upon the provision of additional international support in the form of grants.

Climatic changes are expected to have diverse implications on Lebanons environment, economy, and social conditions. Extreme weather events are and will continue to impact public health, human settlements, infrastructure, agricultural output, power supply and the economy at large. The fragile biodiversity, ecosystems, and natural habitats will be threatened by increased forest fires, pest outbreaks sea level rise, storm intensity and drought. Moreover, a decrease in snow cover, water availability, agricultural productivity, including fisheries and aquaculture, and tourism would impose heavy economic costs. Moreover, studies show that for particularly dry years, when total annual precipitation is low, overall GDP is estimated to have lost more than 60% compared to years when total precipitation reached its optimal. These effects, in turn, would lower incomes for households and businesses, reduce revenues and increase costs to the government. Therefore, adverse climate impacts will add an additional layer of challenges and sets back any improvement in the Lebanese socio-economic status. Lebanon views climate change as a threat multiplier to its current struggles which makes tackling the climate crisis a global priority, and swift adaptation a national one.

Moreover, these principles and priorities are in line with the relevant national sectoral strategies and will inform Lebanons National Adaptation Plan (NAP), w. Furthermore, the most relevant SDGs are listed per sectoral priority; Lebanon considers the SDGs 5 (gender equality), 13 (climate action), 16 (peace, justice and strong institutions) and 17 (partnerships for the goals) to be inherent in the successful achievement of the adaptation priorities and are therefore considered relevant to all actions. The achievement of the different adaptation priorities is highly interactive. Moreover, the implementation of the above-mentioned Climate Action Enablers is crucial to the achievement of the adaptation priorities.

1. Achieve food and water security through the sustainable management of resources 2. Enhance the resilience of the infrastructure, urban and rural areas to subsist climate- related disasters 3. Ensure and protect public health, well-being and safety of all communities through climate- resilient systems 4. Incorporate Nature-Based Solutions as a first line of defense from adverse impacts of climate change 5. Combat desertification and land degradation by achieving Land Degradation Neutrality 6. Substantially reduce the risk of climate and non-climate related disasters to protect lives, Adaptation priority 1 Strengthen the agricultural sectors resilience to enhance Lebanons agricultural output in a climate-smart manner Mitigation co-benefit(s) Climate-smart agriculture includes GHG reducing measures such as managing quantities and types of fertilizers  Restore the livelihoods and productive capacity of farmers and producers;

Increase agricultural production and productivity;

Strengthen the enabling institutional environment;

Increase resilience of households with reference to food and nutrition security.

Adaptation priority 2 Promote the sustainable use of natural resources, restore degraded landscapes, and increase Lebanons forest cover while meeting the ecological, social and economic needs of sustainable forest management Mitigation co-benefit(s) Reforestation, afforestation and land restoration activities enhance carbon sinks Mediterranean Forests to Fulfil the NDCs10;

Adapt forest systems to climate change by halting land degradation, controlling erosion of topsoil, improving water quality and soil productivity;

Promote sustainable rangeland management;

Reduce the risk of intense and frequent forest fires through the development of fire prevention measures and early warning systems;

Manage pest and disease outbreaks to protect forests and forest resources. Reference document Ministry of Agricultures National Forest Program (NFP), National Strategy for Forest Fire Management and the National Afforestation/Reforestation Programme 40 Million Forest Trees Planting Programme (NARP) Adaptation priority 3 Structure and develop sustainable water services, including irrigation, in order to improve people's living conditions Mitigation co-benefit(s) Irrigation using clean energy sources reduces GHG emissions  Implement the Beirut Water Declaration11;

Encourage and support the use of renewable energy in agricultural irrigation and in drinking water supply;

Build an operational and sustainable legal and institutional framework to ensure sustainable and efficient services;

Involve all actors in the service chain and establish sustainable mechanisms for transparency.

Reference document Ministry of Energy and Waters National Water Sector Strategy (NWSS) and Ministry of Agricultures 2020-2025 Strategy Value and sustainably manage Lebanons terrestrial and marine biodiversity for the preservation and conservation of its ecosystems and habitats and the species they harbour in order to adequately respond to anthropogenic and natural pressures and to ensure Lebanese citizens equal access to ecosystem goods and services Mitigation co-benefit(s) Biodiversity management contributes to carbon sinks and the blue economy conservation actions on 50% of threatened species;

Protect at least 20% of natural terrestrial and marine ecosystems and represent all types of ecosystems in the protected areas network;

Lebanons area;

Implement rehabilitation plans in at least 20% of degraded sites so that they can safeguard the sustained delivery of ecosystem services.

Reference document Ministry of Environments National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) and the Assessment of Climate Change Impact on Lebanon Coastal Zone report Adaptation priority 5 Reduce the vulnerability of climate change impacts on coastal zones, especially in cities  Assess the sea-water intrusion in the major coastal aquifers;

Enhance the Artificial Recharge of some selected aquifers;

Refresh the water budgeting of all aquifers progressively;  Perform the modelling of the karstic, saline and porous aquifer;  Increase the protective capacity of coasts against storm surges and sea-level rise;  Promote sustainable use of natural resources, such as fisheries.

Reference document Ministry of Energy and Waters National Water Sector Strategy (NWSS) and Ministry of Agriculture 2020-2025 Strategy Adaptation priority 6 Ensure overall public health and safety through climate-resilient health systems  Assess the vulnerability of public health sector to climate change, identifying the  Build the capacity of health sector professionals in the identification of health impacts from other sectors (e.g. transport, energy, food, water, housing and urban development;

Empower and ensure sustainability of existing environmental health functions and services to face challenges of water security for health, water quality degradation, droughts, heat waves, food security and safety, vectors redistribution, air quality degradation, floods and other climate related natural disasters;

Epidemiological Surveillance Unit;

Develop health system response strategies, plans and projects and integrate them into national health strategies.

Reference document The National Health and Environment Strategy 2016-2021, MoPH, WHO, Adaptation priority 7 Reduce disaster risk and minimize damages by mitigating and adapting to climate- related natural hazards and extreme weather  Conduct a multi-hazard risk assessment;

Update/revisit flood, fire and drought risk maps;

Upgrade and develop an early warning platform for multi-hazards;

Coordinate the updating of the National Forest fire management strategy.

Annex I: Information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding (ICTU) of Lebanons mitigation part of the NDC 1. Lebanon commits to unconditionally reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by 20% below its Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario (amounting to 7,790 Gg. CO2eq.) and to conditionally reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by 31% below its Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario in 2030 (amounting to 12,075 Gg. CO2eq.) 2. Lebanon commits to unconditionally generate 18% of its power demand(i.e. electricity demand) and 11% of its heat demand (in the building sector) by renewable energy sources and to conditionally generate 30% (i.e. electricity demand) of its power demand and 16.5% of its heat demand (in the building sector) by renewable energy sources in 2030 3. Lebanon commits to unconditionally reduce power demand through energy efficiency measures by 3% under the Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario and to conditionally reduce power demand through energy efficiency measures by 10% under the Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario in 2030 Numbers reflect rounding Information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding (ICTU) of Lebanon's NDC 1 Quantifiable information on the reference point (including, as appropriate, a base year):

(a) Reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s) 1. Reference point: GHG emissions level in the projected BAU scenario in 2030 2. Reference point: power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and heat demand (in the building sector) in the projected BAU scenario in 2030 3. Reference point: Power demand (i.e. electricity demand) in the projected BAU scenario in 2030 The BAU scenario does not take into account mitigation actions implemented after 2011.

Quantifiable information on the reference indicators, their values in the reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s), and, as applicable, in the target year 1. GHG emissions level in the projected BAU scenario in 2030: 38,950 Gg CO2eq. 2. Power demand (i.e. electricity demand) in the projected BAU scenario in 2030: 34,742 GWh, and heat demand in the building sector in the projected BAU scenario in 2030: 18 PJ 3. Power demand (i.e. electricity demand) in the projected BAU scenario in 2030: 34,742 GWh For strategies, plans and actions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement, or polices and measures as components of nationally determined contributions where paragraph 1(b) above is not applicable, Parties to provide other relevant information Not applicable.

1. Target: unconditionally reduce GHG emissions by 20% below the BAU scenario (amounting to 7,790 Gg. CO2eq.) and to conditionally reduce GHG emissions by 31% below the BAU scenario (amounting to 12,075 Gg. CO2eq.) in 2030 2. Target: unconditionally generate 18% of the power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 11% of the heat demand in the building sector by renewable energy sources and to conditionally generate 30% of the power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 16.5% of the heat demand in the building sector by renewable energy sources in 2030 3. Target: unconditionally reduce power demand through energy efficiency measures by 3% under the BAU scenario and to conditionally reduce power demand through energy efficiency measures by 10% under the BAU scenario in 2030 The sources of data used to quantify the reference points consist of Lebanons Third National Communication (TNC)s time series analysis, as well as information stemming from consultations with the different concerned ministries through consultations. Moreover, information included in ministerial strategies as well as estimates from international organizations have been used to quantify the reference points. The BAU and mitigation scenarios were developed for all sectors using the Low Emissions Analysis Platform (LEAP) software.

(f) Information on the circumstances under which the Party may update the values of the reference indicators The GHG emissions level for the BAU scenario, unconditional and conditional targets in 2030 may be updated and recalculated depending on methodological changes in the GHG inventory, such as recalculating the GHG inventory with the 2006 IPCC Guidelines or changes in Global Warming Potential (GWP) in IPCC Assessment Reports, or the adoption of the 2019 IPCC Refinement. Information on updates made will be included in the Biennial Transparency Reports (BTR).

Time frames and/or periods for implementation:

Time frame and/or period for implementation, including start and end date, consistent with any further relevant decision adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA) Lebanon has already begun implementing the actions and activities needed to meet this commitment. It will continue to do so until 2030.

3 Scope and coverage:

(a) General description of the target Please refer to 1 (d) above.

Sectors, gases, categories and pools covered by the nationally determined contribution, including, as applicable, consistent with Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) guidelines Lebanons NDC is an economy wide absolute GHG emissions target. Information provided in Lebanon's inventory as part of its Biennial Transparency Report (BTR) will be consistent with the IPCC guidelines.

Sectors Energy, industrial processes and product use, agriculture, forestry and land-use, and waste.

Gases Carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O). The inclusion of perfluorocarbons (PFCs), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) and nitrogen trifluoride (NF3) will be added to the NDC coverage once included in Lebanons GHG inventory.

For agriculture, forestry and land-use, emissions and removals the following reporting categories are included: forest land, cropland, grassland, and wetland (wetland remaining wetland only from 2026), including land use changes between the categories, and between these categories and settlements and other land. The five carbon pools above-ground biomass, below-ground biomass, litter, dead wood and soil organic matters are included. In addition, the carbon pool harvested wood products is included.

(c) How the Party has taken into consideration paragraph 31(c) and (d) of decision 1/CP.21 Lebanon's inventory describes the sources considered insignificant and reported as not estimated. A similar approach, consistent with decision 18/CMA.1, will be used for reporting under the Paris Agreement.

Mitigation co-benefits resulting from Parties adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans, including description of specific projects, measures and initiatives of Parties adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans Not applicable.

4 Planning processes:

(a) Information on the planning processes that the Party undertook to prepare its nationally determined contribution and, if available, on the Partys implementation plans, including, as appropriate:

Domestic institutional arrangements, public participation and engagement with local communities and indigenous peoples, in a gender-responsive manner The NDC update has gone through an inter-ministerial validation process to ensure the unification of views on the way forward for Lebanon in the next 10 years. 1. Meetings with sectoral mitigation experts from line ministries were conducted to assess where additional ambition in the NDC could be allocated. 2. An adaptation expert meeting comprising ministerial experts, academia and technical consultants was conducted to assess the enhanced adaptation targets, and their appropriateness considering Lebanons special circumstances.

3. A Non-State Actors (NSA) consultation meeting which included academic experts, youth, the private sector and civil society organizations was also organized to ensure their participation in defining the 2020 NDC update.

4. Gender representatives were engaged in the different consultation meetings. 5. Finally, the results were presented to the official inter-ministerial NDC committee, headed by the Ministry of Environment. Once feedback was received, the NDC was sent to the Council of Ministers for official approval.

The NDC implementation process is coordinated by the Ministry of Environment and the implementation of the numerous sectoral policies is the responsibility of the line ministries.

(ii) Contextual matters, including, inter alia, as appropriate:

a.

National circumstances, such as geography, climate, economy, sustainable development and poverty eradication Please refer to 1. Section 1 of this NDC: National Circumstances 2. Part I of Lebanons Third Biennial Update Report (BUR3) submitted to the UNFCCC in b. Best practices and experience related to the preparation of the nationally determined contribution 1. The implementation of Lebanons NDC, as well as the development of the Low- Emission Development Strategy (LEDS), has been mandated by the official economic recovery plan of Lebanon, prioritizing climate action in the reform process. Therefore, the integration of the NDC into higher-level governmentally endorsed plan enhances climate action.

2. This NDC highlights the important linkages between climate action and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Lebanon assessed the relationship between the sectoral adaptation and mitigation policies and the 169 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) sub-targets which resulted in numerous synergies in implementation and tracking. This exercise contributes to fully synchronizing the planning of climate action and sustainable development, which is made clear in this NDC.

3. Lebanon thoroughly assessed the extent of gender-responsiveness in its climate- related policies through a gender analysis. A set of recommendations for gender integration into strategies, including the NDC was produced to ensure that climate action is implemented through a gender lens. This NDC strives to fully integrate gender in order to enhance implementation and consider vulnerable groups.

c. Other contextual aspirations and priorities acknowledged when joining the Paris Agreement Not applicable.

Specific information applicable to Parties, including regional economic integration organizations and their member States, that have reached an agreement to act jointly under Article 4, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement, including the Parties that agreed to act jointly and the terms of the agreement, in accordance with Article 4, paragraphs 1618, of the Paris Agreement Not applicable.

How the Partys preparation of its nationally determined contribution has been informed by the outcomes of the global stocktake, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreement The first global stocktake is to take place in 2023. Lebanon participated in the Talanoa Dialogue in 2018 where it committed to enhance the ambition of its NDC and welcomed the IPCC special report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways.

Each Party with a nationally determined contribution under Article 4 of the Paris Agreement that consists of adaptation action and/or economic diversification plans resulting in mitigation co-benefits consistent with Article 4, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement to submit information on:

How the economic and social consequences of response measures have been considered in developing the nationally determined contribution Specific projects, measures and activities to be implemented to contribute to mitigation co-benefits, including information on adaptation plans that also yield mitigation co- benefits, which may cover, but are not limited to, key sectors, such as energy, resources, water Not applicable.

5 Assumptions and methodological approaches, including those for estimating and accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and, as appropriate, removals:

Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals corresponding to the Partys nationally determined contribution, consistent with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 31, and accounting guidance adopted by the CMA Lebanon is accounting for its anthropogenic GHG emissions and removals using the 2006 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, and 2013 Supplement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Wetlands (collectively, the 2006 IPCC Guidelines).

Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for the implementation of policies and measures or strategies in the nationally determined contribution See 5(a) above. Lebanon will also apply specific assumptions and methodologies, where relevant, when accounting for progress of various policies and measures in its Biennial Update Report or Biennial Transparency Report.

If applicable, information on how the Party will take into account existing methods and guidance under the Convention to account for anthropogenic emissions and removals, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 14, of the Paris Agreement, as appropriate See 5(a) above.

(d) IPCC methodologies and metrics used for estimating anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals The IPCC 2006 guidelines and parts of IPCC 2013 Wetlands Supplement is being used for estimating GHG emissions and removals. Global warming potentials (GWP) for a 100-year time horizon from the IPCCs fifth Assessment Report (AR5) is being used to calculate CO2 equivalents.

(e) Sector-, category- or activity-specific assumptions, methodologies and approaches consistent with IPCC guidance, as appropriate, including, as applicable:

(i) Approach to addressing emissions and subsequent removals from natural disturbances on managed lands GHG emissions and removals from natural disturbances, if any, will be accounted for in accordance with the prescribed 2006 IPCC Guidelines.

(ii) Approach used to account for emissions and removals from harvested wood products GHG emissions and removals from harvested wood products, if any, will be accounted for in accordance with the prescribed 2006 IPCC Guidelines.

Not applicable.

(f) Other assumptions and methodological approaches used for understanding the nationally determined contribution and, if applicable, estimating corresponding emissions and removals, including:

How the reference indicators, baseline(s) and/or reference level(s), including, where applicable, sector-, category- or activity- specific reference levels, are constructed, including, for example, key parameters, assumptions, definitions, methodologies, data sources and models used 1. To quantify the GHG emissions level in the projected BAU scenario in 2030, the following assumptions were made for emission growth drivers:

Population growth was estimated to be 1.65% annually till 2030, based on World Bank estimates.

Moreover, when it comes to energy emissions, it was assumed that electricity demand will increase by 3.5% annually and that electricity demand which cannot be satisfied by the installed generation capacity, continues to be largely satisfied through private diesel generators. Also, in the BAU scenario, electricity production is decreasing by 1.3% per year due to the degradation of power plants. Finally, exploration activities in the offshore oil and gas sector has started in 2020 with the drilling of the first deep water well. However emission-intensive production and development operations are not expected to start before 2028, potentially contributing to the increase in GHG emissions level.

For transport emissions, it was assumed that the fleet will be increasing by 3% annually. As for agriculture, emissions remain stable in the BAU scenario. As for forestry, due to an increase in deforestation, increase in forest fires and urban sprawl, the LULUCF sink is limited at a rate of 1% per year. Both the agriculture and forestry assumptions were made based on the time series analysis. As for waste emissions, generation is estimated to increase with population growth and with waste generation per capita increasing from 1.05 to 1.30 kg/capita/day.

Finally, industrial emissions are estimated to increase by 2.5% annually.

2. To quantify the reference point, the following assumptions were made for heat and power demand (i.e. electricity demand) growth:

Heat demand: heat demand has been considered only for the building sector based on data availability.

Power demand: Electricity demand increases by 3.5% annually; the electricity demand which cannot be satisfied by the installed generation capacity, continues to be largely met through private diesel generators.

3. To quantify the reference point, the following assumptions were made for power demand (i.e. electricity demand) growth: Electricity demand increases by 3.5% annually; the electricity demand which cannot be satisfied by the installed generation capacity, continues to be largely met through private diesel generators.

For Parties with nationally determined contributions that contain non greenhouse-gas components, information on assumptions and methodological approaches used in relation to those components, as applicable Not applicable.

For climate forcers included in nationally determined contributions not covered by IPCC guidelines, information on how the climate forcers are estimated Not applicable.

Not applicable.

(g) The intention to use voluntary cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, if applicable While at present, the use of Article 6 mechanisms is not envisaged, Lebanon does not exclude the possibility of making use of international market mechanisms to achieve its NDC targets.

6 How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances:

How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances Considering Lebanons difficult national circumstances and its regional context as depicted in the national circumstances in this NDC, as well as its low share in global emissions, Lebanon therefore considers the targets put forward in this update as fair and ambitious. Moreover, Lebanon applied the ICTU guidance to this 2020 NDC in order to enhance its clarity, transparency and understanding. The NDC GHG targets have been methodologically updated to reflect the national GHG inventory with the use of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines and the 100-year time-horizon GWP values from the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report.

This NDC represents a progression beyond Lebanons 2015 NDC by unconditionally increasing its GHG emission target relative to the BAU scenario from 15% to 20%, and conditionally increasing its GHG emission target relative to the BAU scenario from 30% to 31%. Moreover, Lebanon commits to unconditionally generate 18% of the power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 11% of its heat demand in the building sector from renewable energy sources in 2030, compared to a combined 15% in 2015. Conditionally, Lebanon commits to generate 30% of the power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 16.5% of its heat demand in the building sector from renewable energy sources in 2030, compared to a combined 20% in 2015. The BAU level in 2030 changed due to the use of the IPCC 2006 guidelines as opposed to the 1996 Revised IPCC Guidelines used in the 2015 NDC, adding 0.97 percentage points to the 15% 2015 unconditional target, and adding 0.45 percentage points to the 30% 2015 conditional target. Despite this change, the 2020 NDC targets have increased to reach 20% unconditionally and 31% conditionally, due to increased mitigation effort.

BAU Level in 2030 43,484 Gg CO2eq. 38,950 Gg CO2eq. 38,950 Gg CO2eq.

6,523 Gg CO2eq. 6,222 Gg CO2eq. 7,790 Gg CO2eq.

13,045 Gg CO2eq. 11,860 GgCO2eq. 12,075 Gg CO2eq.

Lebanons 2020 NDC target pertaining to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions by 20% below its Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario and to conditionally reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by 31% below its Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario, is an economy-wide target.

Not applicable.

7 How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2:

How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2 Lebanons 2020 NDC contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2, the objective of the Paris Agreement as set out in its Article 2, and Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Paris Agreement through enhancing its mitigation efforts as per 6(c) above, therefore reducing GHG emissions further and accelerating the energy transition.

