Lesotho,a country highlyvulnerableto climatechange impacts presents its Nationally usudl (BAU) scendrio emission of 5.713 Metric Tonnes of Cdrbon dioxide equivdlent (MTCO2e). An ddditiondl 25/o GHG emission reduction is dTTdindble on condition ThdT exTerndl supporT (findnce, invesTmenT, Technology development dnd Trdnsfer, dnd The full cosT of implementing The dddpTdTion dnd miTigdTion dcTions. WiTh The exTerndl support, d combinedToTdl emission reduction of 35% below The BAU emission levels con be dchieved by 2030.

NoTwiThsTdnding her minimdl conTribuTion To The climdTe chdnge phenomenon, LesoTho dccepTs The need To conTribuTeTo The globdl miTigdTion effort dnd is dwdre of The need for her emphdsis To be pldced on dddpTdTion. LesoTho dlso inTends To underTdke numerous dddpTdTion iniTidTives To enhdnce resilience dnd reduce vulnerdbiliTyof her populdTion, environmenT dnd economy To The ddverse impdcTs of climdTe chdnge. This con be dchieved by mdinsTredming climdTe chdnge dddption inTo ndTiondl developmenT policies, sTrdTegies,dnd pldns in line wiTh The counTrys her population...

LesoThos NdTiondlly Determined Contribution (NDC) is on improved version of The lnTended NdTiondlly Determined Contribution (INDC) which LesoTho presenTed To The UniTed NdTions Frdmework ConvenTion on ClimdTe Chdnge (UNFCCC) in September 2015. The counTry is chdnge. FirsTly, The mdin focus is on dcTiviTies which incredse The courTrys resilience dnd mdjoriTyof LesoThos populdTion in Cl significdnt wdy dnd mdy conTinue To deTeriordTe unless drdsTic medsures ore Token To fight dnd miTigdTe climdTe chdnge. Secondly, LesoTho is TrdnsiTioning To lowcdrbon dnd more climdTe resilienT developmenT pdThwdys. Effectively,The NDC dims To puT for"h dddpTdTion dnd miTigdTion dcTions ThdT LesoTho willToke To TdckleiTs growing vulnerdbiliTyTo climdTe chdnge dnd GHG emissions. In pursudnce of ArTicle 2 of The Pdris dddpTdTion dnd efforts To limiT globdl dverdge TemperdTure To well below 2C dbove pre- indusTridl levels dnd pursuing efforTs To limiT The TemperdTure incredse To l.5C dbove pre- indusTridllevels.

The informdtion presenTed in This submission is bdsed on The ddTd dvdildble dT The Time of prepdring This N DC.

2.1 NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT GOALS AND PRIORITIES: CLIMATE CHANGE CONTEXT 4 2.2 SUMMARY OF CLIMATE CHANGE TRENDS 6 3.1 CURRENT ADAPTATION UNDERTAKINGS: STRATEGIES, POLICIES, PROGRAMMES AND MEASURES 8 3.2 SUMMARY OF LESOTHOS ADAPTATION NEEDS 10 5.0 CLIMATE MITIGATION ACTIONS IN THE REFRIGERATION AND AIR CONDITIONING (RAC) SECTOR 20 7.1 INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR IMPLEMENTATION 24 7.2 AMBITION AND FAIRNESS AND EQUITY 24 7.3 MONITORING AND EVALUATION SYSTEM 25 7.4 GAPS, BARRIERS AND NEEDS 25 7.4.1 SPECIFIC BARRIERS TO ADAPTATION IN LESOTHO 26 7.5 GENDER, YOUTH AND VULNERABLE GROUPS IMPERATIVES OF CLIMATE CHANGE 27 7.6 PLANNING PROCESS 27 7.7 REVIEW AND ADJUSTMENT 28 1.0 Introduction Lesothos geographical characteristics and prevailing socioeconomic conditions among the majority of its rural population make it one of the most vulnerable countries to the impacts of climate change. Current trends in the energy demand coupled with over-reliance on imported fossil fuels by majority of Basotho are patently unsustainable in many fronts  environmentally, socially and economically. Without decisive action, energy-related emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) will continue to rise. It is therefore imperative for Lesotho to change its current path. Such a change entails an energy revolution with low-carbon energy technologies plying a crucial role together with widespread deployment of various types of renewable energy, carbon capture and storage and new transport technologies. More so, every sector of the economy must be actively involved, if the country is to achieve its GHG emissions reduction targets. Mitigation has to be achieved in all sectors. Lesothos plan to mitigate GHG emissions is built on some of the following pillars:

Adoption of climate-smart agricultural practices for greater food security and higher famers income  Increased GHG sequestration in forestry, i.e., afforestation, reforestation and protecting forests for their economic and ecosystem services.

Energy efficiency measures, deployment of renewable energy sources in power generation (hydro, solar and wind), promotion and dissemination of clean energy technologies (efficient cook-stoves and LPGs) to reduce overreliance on fuel wood.

Adoption of modern, efficient and advanced technologies in industry, transport and buildings.  Sustainable waste management systems: solid waste management, wastewater recycling, composting of biodegradable waste and possible methane recovery from landfills.

The NDC has been formulated based on previously submitted INDCs guided by the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, as formed by different national circumstances.

2 Government of Lesotho (GoL), 2012. National Strategic Development Plan 2012/13  2016/17. Maseru. GoL. 3 Chakela, Q.K. (ed.), 1999. State of the environment in Lesotho 1997. Maseru: National Environment Secretariat, Ministry of Environment, Gender and Youth Affairs.

In recent years, Lesothos development policies, plans and programmes are mainly guided by Lesotho Vision 2020, currently operationalized through the five-year National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) 2012/13-2016/17 that is currently being updated to 2021/2022. The NSDP is a strategy that aims to contribute to the broader National Vision 2020. It adopts an integrated, systemic approach and encompasses medium-term economic development, poverty reduction and longer-term sustainable development issues. This planning document also provides detailed guidance on priorities and specific actions to be taken during the planning period, including actions that contribute to longer term development objectives beyond 2017. The document explicitly highlights that there is a potential for energy generation based on renewable sources, provided financial resources are available. The energy sector is regarded as a source of economic growth, climate change mitigation and eventually export revenues. To that end, the strategy articulates the following three goals:

Increase clean energy production capacity to attain self-sufficiency, export and have a greener economy.

Expand electricity access to centres of economic activity, other sectors and households.

Increase energy conservation, safety and access to alternative (non-electricity) energy products and efficient technologies.

The plan also identifies reversing land degradation, protecting water sources through integrated land and water resource management, improving national resilience to climate change and increasing clean energy production capacity and environment-friendly production methods as some of the main national priorities and strategic goals to reduce poverty and achieve sustainable development. Furthermore, it advocates for improving environment and climate change governance as well as increasing the greening of the economy.

Although Lesotho does not have a climate change policy yet, the country continues to exert visible efforts that amply reflect the increasing importance of climate change issues. Suffice to say, Lesotho is at an advanced stage of finalizing Climate Change Policy and Strategy as well as the Sustainable Energy Strategy to spur climate change activities and provide policy guidance for development of appropriate administrative and legislative framework, in harmony with other sectoral policies for the pursuance of a low-carbon development path. These instruments are being crafted under EU Technical Assistance project titled Support to the Climate Change Response Strategy to the Kingdom of Lesotho. The project aims to achieve the following:

National Climate Change policy with Adaptation and Mitigation Strategy inclusive of implementation cost;

National Sustainable Energy Strategy inclusive of implementation cost;  Capacity enhancement through the strengthening of frameworks (institutional, regulatory, strategic and monitoring and evaluation) to ensure continued focus on areas of climate change and sustainable energy in Lesotho. Specifically concerning adaptation to climate change, the priorities are outlined in the National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA, 2007), which entails the identification of the countrys urgent and immediate priority needs so that effective implementation measures may be put into place to combat the adverse effects of climate change. The programme identified eleven adaptation options denoting key adaptation needs that communities need to be supported with in order to sustain livelihoods in view of climate change risks The vision for the National Energy Policy (2015-2025) is Energy shall be universally accessible and affordable in a sustainable manner, with minimal negative impact on the environment. Reducing fossil fuel imports is the major goal, with the uptake of renewable energy along with further energy efficiency improvements on both the demand and supply sides. In addition to the above-mentioned key climate change related policies, Lesotho has in the recent past developed other environmental and sectoral policies, strategies, projects, programmes and plans that implicitly address climate change issues. These include:

National Forestry Policy 2008;  Draft Renewable Energy Policy 2013;  Agriculture Sector Strategy 2003;  National Conservation Agriculture Strategy Framework 2012  2017;  Lesotho Food Security Policy 2005, and the resultant National Action Plan for Food Security 2007  2017;  Transport Policy 2006;

Water and Sanitation Policy 2007;  Long Term Water and Sanitation Strategy 2014;  Environmental Education Strategy Towards 2014;  National Health Policy 2012;  Draft Soil and Water Conservation Policy;  National Range Resources Management Policy 2013;  National Range Action Plan 2015;  Second National Communication, 2015;  National Disaster Risk Reduction Policy 2007;  National Environment Policy 1998; and  Environment Act 2008.

Notwithstanding developments of the above-mentioned policies, climate change has not been adequately integrated in sectoral policies and plans. Cognizant of that, Lesotho intends to utilize existing frameworks, policies, projects and activities that provide mitigation and adaptation co-benefits to conceptualize the elaboration of its NDC. The NDC for Lesotho is consistent with the overall goal of the NSDP which encompasses medium-term economic development, poverty reduction, and longer-term sustainable development.

2.2 Summary of Climate Change Trends Lesotho is implementing the Third National Communication (TNC) to the UNFCCC, which will eventually produce updated findings with respect to climate change trends and projected impacts. For now, existing data from the Second National Communication must be used to guide planning for climate change. Figure 1 shows the Lesothos average annual temperatures for the period 1967 to 2006. Though average annual temperature has been highly variable from year to year, an overall increasing trend is observable. The effective increase in Lesothos mean annual temperatures over the analysed period was 0.76C (giving an average rate of increase of 0.20oC per decade). The trend analysis of temperature over most areas in Lesotho (Fig.2b) shows increase in both annual maximum and minimum temperatures between 1970 and 2005 with minimum temperatures warming more than the maximum temperatures and the most rapid warming occurring in the early 1980s. The mean seasonal temperatures are projected to increase by between 1.78oC and 2.20C by 2060 in many areas of Lesotho7.

7Dejene A., S. Midgley, M.V. Marake and S. Ramasamy. 2011. Strengthening Capacity for Climate Change Adaptation in Agriculture: Experience and Lessons from Lesotho. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Blue Book Series.

Figure 1: Mean annual temperature in Lesotho: 1967  2004.

Some of the observed changes in the climate are: slightly decreased annual precipitation; changes in seasonal rainfall patterns  including progressive increase in winter season precipitation accompanied by an opposite trend in the summer season, in some regions; which led to drying out of traditionally perennial springs; and diminishing of normally large rivers along with many dams remaining dry for most of the year. Figure 2 shows a decreasing trend in rainfall and an increasing trend in average temperatures in representative districts for lowlands of Lesotho for the period 1970 - 2005.

Under various climate change scenarios, projections show intensification of these changes in the first half of the 21st century: More recent climate change simulations show temperatures increasing by about 1C by 2030, 1.5-2.0C by 2050, and by about 2.5-3.5C by the 2080s while winter rainfall shows strong decreases, with no change in summer and autumn rainfall, and gradually increasing spring rainfall. The above-mentioned projections will have impacts on different sectors of the economy.

Notwithstanding its minimal contribution to the climate change phenomenon, the Lesotho accepts the need to contribute to the global mitigation effort but is aware of the need for its emphasis to be placed on adaptation. Lesothos capacity to undertake and sustain strong mitigation actions is dependent upon support for the implementation of the cross-cutting adaptation actions described in this document. For Lesothos NDC, the adaptation options considered as top priority are those that will permit the higher co-benefits with respect to climate change mitigation, particularly those good adaptation practices and techniques which will permit carbon sequestration and reduction of GHG emissions at the same time. These adaptation options have already been well defined in the existing strategic frameworks, such as the National Adaption Programme of Action (NAPA) 2007. The countrys NAPA identify agriculture, energy, water, forestry, gender, infrastructure and human health as sectors and thematic areas which are highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, climate variability and extreme climate events. The vulnerability is further compounded by a number of other factors, including high levels of poverty particularly in rural areas, the scattered nature of rural settlements, which makes the provision of and access to social services difficult. For instance, climate-sensitive rain-fed agriculture is the mainstay of Lesothos agro-based economy. It accounts for 7% to 10% of the GDP (down from 25% in the 1980s), furthermore, up to 80% of Lesotho's population engage in some form of agriculture related activity. One of the guiding principles is to develop and implement integrated adaptation and mitigation solutions that are cost-effective, improve energy efficiency, promote cleaner production, and provide adaptation/mitigation synergies as well as economic, environmental and socioeconomic benefits. Hydroelectricity has great potential in providing clean energy, an opportunity to reduce GHG emissions and also meet other objectives such as flood, irrigation and water supply management. Forestry based actions will not only increase the amount of GHG sinks, but will also provide adaptation co-benefits contributing to prevention of flooding, soil erosion and landslides, protection of biodiversity and ecosystem services and recovery of degraded land. The rural electrification programme will reduce GHG emissions, promote rural development local entrepreneurship, reduce poverty, reduce rural exodus through job creation, strengthen social cohesion, improve education and health, improve access to new information and communication technologies and energy equipment and alleviation of womens domestic duties.

3.1 Current Adaptation Undertakings: Strategies, Policies, Programmes and Measures To guide the adaptation process, seven sectoral vulnerability and adaptation assessments were completed under the countrys Second National Communication to determine the vulnerability profile and identify possible adaptation interventions and options. In addition, eleven adaptation projects were identified by the NAPA 2007 and ranked in order of priority as follows:

1. Improve Resilience of Livestock Production Systems under Extreme Climatic Conditions in Various Livelihood Zones in Lesotho 2. Promoting Sustainable Crop Based Livelihood Systems in Foothills, Lowlands and the Senqu River Valley 3. Capacity Building and Policy Reform to Integrate Climate Change in Sectoral Development Plans 4. Improvement of an Early Warning System against Climate Induced Disasters and Hazards 5. Securing Village Water Supply for Communities in the Southern Lowlands 6. Management and Reclamation of Degraded and Eroded Land in the Flood Prone Areas (Pilot Project for Western Lowlands) 7. Conservation and Rehabilitation of Degraded Wetlands in the Mountain Areas of Processing and Preservation Technologies 9. Strengthening and stabilizing eco-tourism based rural livelihoods 10. Promote Wind, Solar and Biogas Energy Use as a Supplement to Hydropower Energy 11. Stabilizing Community Livelihoods which are Adversely Affected by Climate Change Through Improvement of Small Scale Industries Many of the actions have strong synergies with mitigation actions. Table 1 shows current, on- going and planned adaptation undertakings Table 1: Strategies for Agriculture (crops and livestock), Forest and Land Rehabilitation Program Project name Implementation State Developing capacity for climate change adaptation capacity in the agricultural sector 2009  2011 Conservation agriculture: advocacy, extension / training, research integration into formal curricula 2005 to date Sorghum breeding for high yield and drought tolerance 1996 to date High efficiency irrigation systems: Gravity & Drip 1995 to date Increasing Capacity for Climate Change Adaptation in the Agriculture Sector 2008-2019 Lesotho Climate Change Adaptation of Small-Scale Agricultural Production 2011-2017 Smallholder Agriculture Development Project  Cropping Systems 2011-2017 Adopt improved agricultural systems for both crops and livestock 2020-2030 Implement strategies for improved resource management 2020-2030 Lesotho wool & mohair improvement project 2015-2022 Lesotho Block Farming Initiatives 2005 to date Smallholder Agriculture Development Project  Livestock 2011-2017 Land Rehabilitation Program 2005 to date Mechanism to Implement the Forestry Initiative for Landscape and Livelihood Improvement Program Forestry Initiative for Landscape and Livelihoods Improvement Program 2015-2016 Strengthen the implementation of the national Community-Based Forest Resources Management Programme Support review and implementation of the National Forest Policy. 2020-2030 Develop and maintain a frequent forest inventory system to facilitate monitoring of forest status; and initiate a research programme on a range of climate change-related topics Provide extension services to civil society organizations, communities and the private sector to help establish and restore community and private natural forests, plantations and nurseries.

3.2 Summary of Lesothos Adaptation Needs For Lesotho to attain enhanced adaptive capacity and resilience to the negative impacts of climate change there is urgent need for the provision of finance, capacity building and technology. These also underscore the need for research support in climate change adaptation. Sectorally, there are inadequate adaptation capabilities for data collection, processing and provision in the Energy, Agriculture, Land Use, Land Use Changes and Forestry, Health and Water sectors. Consequently, there is need to:

Build capacity of experts and stakeholders in data preparation and collection to enhance information management, ownership, exchange, dissemination and sharing within and across sectors;

Create systemic enabling working environment for the implementation of climate change activities in relation to institutional arrangements, performance management and reporting to ascertain roles and responsibilities, political will, ownership and empowerment, decision making and service delivery;

Develop a database for reporting raw data which will take into consideration IPCC requirements by carrying out new studies to upgrade the datasets and then make use of remotely sensed and GIS based data;

Coordinate data pools to establish data archiving and sharing protocols;  Support research in climate change.

Table 2 shows examples of vulnerable sectors and adaptation options planned, the majority of which are conditional on the availability and provision of appropriate technology. Table 2: Summary of adaptation actions: Conditional (CC), Unconditional (UC) Capacity Requirements (CR), Technology Requirements (TR) and Finance Requirements (FR) Sectors Intended policy based action Provision of implementation means CC UC CR TR FR Agriculture Diversify livestock; improve range     CC UC CR TR FR management; increase access to drought resistant crops and livestock feeds; adopt better soil management practices; provide early warning/meteorological forecasts and related information.

Increase use of irrigation systems that use low amounts of water; increase rainwater and sustainable ground water harvesting for use in agriculture; increase planting of native vegetation cover and promotion of re-greening efforts; and intensify crop and livestock production.

Build adaptation capacity in climate resilient agronomic practices for smallholder farmers Support an expanded programme of constructing multipurpose dams for irrigation and aquaculture Promote the growing of drought-tolerant and heat-tolerant crop varieties and hardy livestock Adjustment of planting dates and crop variety; crop relocation; improved land management, e.g. erosion control and soil protection through tree planting Expanded rainwater harvesting; water storage and conservation techniques; water re-use; water-use and irrigation efficiency Support an expanded programme of constructing multipurpose dams to enhance water storage Support the revision of water related policies and strategies (including LHDA)     Establish a national integrated water resource management framework that incorporates district and community-based catchment management;

Human Health Build capacity to diagnose, prevent and control climate-sensitive diseases such as diarrheal diseases and malnutrition Enhance public awareness about water, sanitation and hygiene practices; and enhance health surveillance Support expanded programme for preventing and controlling climate- sensitive diseases Construct more health centres in order to improve access to health facilities within a    Support the establishment of centre of excellence for research and disease control targeting climate-sensitive diseases Strengthen the implementation of the national Community-Based Forest Resources Management Programme Develop and maintain a frequent forest inventory system to facilitate monitoring of forest status; and initiate a research programme on a range of climate change- related topics Gender (and vulnerable groups) Promote gender mainstreaming in policies, programmes and projects    Environment Management and Reclamation of Degraded and Eroded Land in the Flood Prone Areas Enhance regulatory protections for species potentially at risk due to climate changes  Support and implement programmes for alternative livelihoods in order to reduce unsustainable resource use that contributes to loss of biodiversity Identify and assess tourism areas that are vulnerable to Climate Change and provide support to planners and policy makers in selecting appropriate policies and adaptation strategies that meet climate adaptation, developmental and environmental goals.

Increase the preparedness of tourism and recreation operation to extreme weather conditions.

Land use Integrated approach to Sustainable Land Use Planning and Management     Promote improved land use practices  Culture Protection and conservation of indigenous Provisions from various areas of environmental act (heritage conservation, pollution, land use, construction, water, environmental impact assessment, and planning law) must be used in an integrated way with the aim of mitigating and adapting to the effects of climate change on heritage properties.

Establishment of an integrated early- warning system, and disaster response plans 4.0 Lesotho's Mitigation Contribution The mitigation targets are set against a Business As Usual (BAU) projection and consider emissions reductions in 5 sectors: (1) Energy, (2) Industrial Processes, (3) Agriculture (livestock and soil), (4) Land-Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF), and (5) Waste. The plan to mitigate GHG emissions is built on the following: Improving crop and livestock production practices for food security while reducing emissions; Protecting and re- establishing forests for their economic and ecosystem services, while sequestering CO2; Expanding electric power generation from renewable energy; Improving access to modern and energy efficient technologies in transport, industry and building sectors. Lesotho mitigation potential will largely depend on its national circumstances. While national efforts are underway and will continue to be exerted toward emission reduction, external support (cost effective technology, capacity building and adequate financial support) is a pre- requisite to achieving the emissions reduction targets set out in this NDC.

4.1 Mitigation targets:

(a) Unconditional target: 10% reduction in GHG emissions compared to business as usual (BAU) by 2030.

(b) Conditional target: An additional 25% reduction under certain conditions which would bring the total GHG reduction to sum 35% of (a) and (b) below BAU emission levels by 20308 (c) Financial Needs: Meeting the conditional target requires an overall investment estimated at 0.59 billion US$ between 2015 and 2030 of which 0.32 billion US$ is conditional upon the following:  accessing new sources of finance and increased support compared to what was received in previous years to be mobilised through new financial mechanisms such as the Green Climate Fund  Legally binding Paris Agreement.  The total annual savings in the conditional scenario is 0.14 billion US$ respectively, for reference and guidance purposes only, Lesotho expects its emission trajectory to be the following:

To reach 3,502 ktCO2eq by 2020 and 3,652 ktCO2eq by 2025, decreasing by 14.6% and 24.2% compared to BAU emission in 2020 and 2025, respectively.

The graph below represents the trajectory of Lesothos conditional and unconditional contribution for the period 2020 - 2030 8 Note: Data given above are subject to changes and update and Lesotho has the right to make necessary changes relating to the baseline an mitigation scenario in light of any up-to-date data by 2020 Figure 3: Trajectory of Lesothos conditional and unconditional contribution for the period 2015-2030  Lesothos GHG inventory produced for the SNC provided historical emissions data between 1995 and 2000 that align with the revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for conducting emission inventories and the 2003 Good Practice Guidance.

Bottom-up approach (modeling of policies and measures one by one and comparison to the BAU scenario);

Projections to 2030 were developed for each individual source category for CO2, CH4 and N2O.  Following a prioritization of all possible mitigation actions, emission reductions projections were made based on assumed economic growth, changes in population, energy supplies and prices, as well as the adoption of new technologies and the impacts of government policies.

Fluorinated gases are not covered; they are rarely used in Lesotho and their emissions are marginal?

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Sectors covered: Energy Energy production Energy demand (households, transport, industry, services agriculture) Agriculture Enteric fermentation and Manure management Cropping systems Land use for agriculture ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- BAU Scenario:

GHG emissions projections for 2030 starting in the base year 2000 do not take into account mitigation measures and actions implemented from base year 2000.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Mitigation Scenarios:

GHG mitigation projections to 2030 were estimated with 2000 emissions as the baseline against which growth and the impact of mitigation measures were calculated. The unconditional mitigation scenario is based on the implementation of the already scheduled or in-progress projects, all of whose funding has been defined, while the conditional scenario assumes the implementation of additional actions over the period 2015-2030 in population, energy supply and prices, the adoption of new technologies and the impact of government policies and measures All the efforts being undertaken by the Government to achieve GHG mitigation objectives are reflected in the National Energy Policy, Draft Renewable Energy Policy and Climate Change Policy and Strategy documents. Through these instruments, Lesotho is committed to ensuring protection of the environment through reduction of GHG emissions by its energy sector as well as preventing other related environmental damages; enhancing its energy security by reducing reliance on fossil fuels and imported electricity; and promoting use of cleaner energy sources and technologies. To that end, Lesotho will, inter alia, undertake the following actions:

Participate in and contribute to the international dialogue and negotiations on limiting climate change through United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and its protocols;

Carry out information dissemination campaigns aimed at reducing emissions from fuel consumption;

Develop information and education materials on energy efficiency in the transport sector;

Promote good driving habits amongst Basotho drivers, including, in particular, those on Government business;

Draw a plan aimed at phasing out the use of leaded petrol in the medium-to- long term.

On a very positive note, the Government of Lesotho, with the cooperation of its developmental partners has made significant strides in the implementation of mitigation measures. Notably, with the technical and financial support of GEF, the Government, developed and implemented the Renewable Energy-Based Rural Electrification (LREBRE) Project across the country  which is still on going. Inter alia, the LREBRE aims to reduce the countrys energy-related CO2 emissions by promoting renewable and low GHG emission technologies as substitutes for fossil fuels prevalently utilized in the countrys rural areas. This project is particularly viewed as success story, as a total of 1,537 SHS with a capacity of 65 W each have been installed since its inception, while a minimum of 500 other SHS have also been independently installed as a result of the projects influence. On the other hand, our state-owned electricity company, Lesotho Electricity Company (LEC), continues to address demand-side-management challenges through conducting public awareness campaigns on the efficient use of electricity. Furthermore, the LEC also focus its efforts on minimizing technical losses and elimination of non-technical losses of energy. On the basis of the energy initiatives surpassing the originally envisaged targets, in 2012 Lesotho significantly revised its electrification access targets upwards. The 2015 target was increased from 35% to 40%, the 2020 target shifted from 40% to 50%, and the 2030 target to 60%. The ambitious targets aim to achieve better access to clean energy for lighting, heating and cooking across the country, and concomitantly address the overarching global issues. In addition to the above highlighted projects, the Government of Lesotho is currently implementing various other projects, with the key ones shown in Table 3. The majority of these projects primarily aim to support investment in electricity supply, to enhance electricity access rate, to improve energy utility efficiency, and ultimately assist the country in reducing poverty and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and simultaneously meets its unconditional contribution with regard to GHG emissions.

Table 3: Summary of mitigation measures under implementation (with the assistance from Development Partners) Global Alliance For Clean Cook-stoves:

Create a market for clean and efficient household cooking solutions in order to save lives, improve livelihoods, empower women, and protect the environment.

Have households to adopt clean and efficient cook stoves and fuels by 2020.

Preparation of National Climate Change Policy and National Sustainable Energy Strategy  Redefining mandates of institutions in the energy sector  Establish pilot min-grid solutions  Pilot distribution of energy efficient household devices  Contribute to the switch from a fossil fuel based energy supply to a sustainable energy supply system based on renewable energies.

Awareness creation and building up training capacities in Lesotho in the field of solar thermal technology and the improvement of the quality, performance and lifetime of solar thermal systems.

Scaling Up Renewable Energy Program (SREP):

Provides concessional resources to scale up low carbon technologies in renewable energy, energy efficiency, and sustainable transport for increased energy access and economic growth.

Help in the establishment of pilot Independent Power Producers from renewable energy sources and distribute electricity to rural areas.

Potential areas of SREP intervention include on-grid renewable energy technologies (hydro, wind and solar), off-grid renewable energy technology (small hydro, solar photovoltaic and hybrid generation systems), capacity building in both the public and private sector and a funding facility for private sector initiatives such as energy efficient cook stoves and solar home systems.

Development of Cornerstone Public Policies and Institutional Capacities to Accelerate SE4ALL Progress  Development policies and strategies to promote private sector investment in mini-grids  Conduct national energy baseline survey  Harmonization of energy data with national energy policy and climate change strategy  Pilot 20 mini-grids  Pilot energy centres (for distribution and demonstration of Implementation of MOU in the Field of Climate Change Vulnerability, Risk Assessment, Adaptation and Mitigation 2030;  To disseminate efficient cook-stoves to reach a penetration rate of 30% in 2030;  To progressively reduce the use of wood for heating in order to 10% by 2030;  To disseminate SHS to reach 15% of the non-electrified population by 2030, and subsequently reduce use of paraffin (kerosene) for lighting.

Global Warming Potential (GWP): The GWP values used are based on the IPCC according to the UNFCCC Decision 17/CP.8 for the compilation of greenhouse gas inventories:

(N20) = 310 Emissions of GHGs not listed are negligible.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Methodology for Estimating Emissions:

The 2000 GHG emissions were completed following 1996 IPCC Guidelines, national statistics, sector activity and economic forecasts. The BAU and mitigation scenarios were developed for all sectors using the Long-range Energy Alternatives Planning Systems (LEAP) software.

Methodology for Estimating Emissions from Agriculture, Forestry and other Land-Use Sectors:

(a) Agriculture sector: GHG emissions are derived from enteric fermentation and manure management cropping systems and agricultural land (cultivated soils). Agricultural residues are mainly as animal feed or as fuel in rural areas (b) Forestry sector and other land use sectors: Takes into account local specific conditions and type of land use in Lesotho: natural forests, Reforestation, afforestation, firewood from forests and forest fires ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Summary of key data regarding the mitigation scenarios (all gases) 2000 2020 2030 Emissions, BAU (ktCO2eq) 2,355 4,822 5,713 Emissions, Unconditional (ktCO2eq) 2,355 4,332 5,142 Emissions, Conditional (ktCO2eq) 2,355 3,653 3,737 This contribution is based on analysis carried out throughout 2015 using the best available data. However data quality and availability is a challenge in Lesotho. Should new and more robust data come to light in future and/or if assumptions change (e.g. projections of population or economic growth) the Government will update its analysis accordingly. This will be coordinated and embedded within the National Communications and Biennial Update Reports reporting cycle.

5.0 Climate mitigation actions in the refrigeration and air conditioning (RAC) Sector The demand for RAC products and appliances in Lesotho is continuously growing. The current and presumably future drivers of demand are, namely:

economic growth, in particular, the expanding middle class and changing lifestyles  growing urbanisation; and  rising temperatures due to global warming.

A potential future additional driver is the increasing level of electrification  especially given various ongoing government initiatives in the energy sector, such as the Rural Electrification Programme. The growing use of RAC appliances leads to increasing GHG emissions due to the two following key reasons:  Firstly, most RAC applications consume electricity, and to date, more than 50% of Lesothos electricity comes from ESKOM (South Africa) where 77% of electricity generation is coal-based, thus GHG intensive (indirect emissions). Actually, it is estimated that more than 25% of electricity consumed in the country is used to operate RAC appliances.

Secondly, most of the appliances use fluorinated gases (F-gases) as refrigerants in their functioning. These gases leak during operation, servicing and when dismantling or disposing of the appliances, causing substantial emissions of greenhouse gases (direct emissions).

The resulting indirect emissions can be significantly reduced through the implementation of modern technologies, increasing energy efficiency and by decarbonizing the energy supply. Direct emissions can be reduced by replacing F-gases with natural refrigerants (CO2, ammonia, hydrocarbons and water) as they have no or negligible GWP. Phasing down F- gases, in particular HFCs, presents a high GHG mitigation potential. High energy consumption and the direct emissions generated when using refrigerants with a high global warming potential (GWP) means the RAC sector impacts significantly on the volume of GHGs produced. The large GHG mitigation potential in the RAC sector lies in transitioning from the highly climate-damaging hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFC) and hydrofluorocarbons (HFC) to alternatives with low Global Warming Potential (GWP) values in a timely manner. Furthermore, the transition to low GWP refrigerants can also yield additional benefits. Some co-benefits are energy and cost savings (through improved energy efficiency) and employment creation (safe handling of systems that use natural refrigerants requires skilled, educated, and qualified technicians to install, operate, and maintain the systems). The training of technicians creates additional employment and allows for safe, efficient handling of RAC appliances. Reduction in energy consumption will also contribute towards Lesothos national energy security. Notably, the RAC sector is currently addressed by the activities outlined in the HCFC Phase- out Management Plan (HPMP), ODS Regulations 2012 which came into force in 2012 to specifically deal with the enforcement and strengthening of ODS controls, and the on-going development of Hydrocarbons servicing and retrofitting safety guidelines. Lesotho has successfully implemented its targets under Stage I of its HPMP and is currently preparing for the implementation of Stage II.

6.0 Means of implementation Lesothos NDC includes both an unconditional and conditional contribution. The unconditional mitigation measures will be achieve by Government budget by mainstreaming the NDC initiatives into existing development programmes and scheduled or in-progress projects, all of whose funding has been defined including those under implementation. The conditional contribution assumes the provision of sufficient and timely international support in the form of finance, investment, technology development and transfer, and capacity building. According to BAU scenario, by 2030 the CO2 emissions will be more than double (increasing from 2,355 kCO2eq to 5,713 kCO2eq). However, the implementation of the measures proposed in the mitigation scenario (as listed in Table 4 and 5), the emissions are estimated to 34.6% less than the BAU scenario 2030 predictions.

Table 4: Key Sectorial Strategies and Targets for the Implementation of Lesothos Mitigation Contribution Sector Key Mitigation Activities Targets Energy (Electricity) Policy/Strategy Document: (Energy Policy 2015  2025)  Continued development of hydropower resources, particularly in terms of advancing technical design and sourcing funding for development of identified sites;

Design and implementation of demand-side management techniques to encourage better use of existing distribution infrastructure, and reduce peak demand.

Improving distribution efficiency of the power system through measures to reduce transmission and distribution losses  Continuing to develop and promote uptake of renewable sources of energy, particularly wind and solar.

Increasing access to clean energy by 35% in 2015, 40% in 2020 and 50% by 2030;

With increase in rural electrification, paraffin consumption is expected to come down from 30, 434 kilolitres (2014) to 25,000 kilolitres in 2020, and 20,000 kilolitres in 2030  Reduce transmission and distribution losses from 12% in 2015 to 7.5% by 2030 (0.5% per annum  Investing in public transport infrastructure and awareness to support a modal shift  Introduction of traffic management systems to reduce congestion during peak hours.

Promote energy efficiency in the transport sector through appropriate policies and investments.

Promoting energy efficiency in buildings through targeted awareness-raising programmes that seek to reduce demand in industrial, business, government and residential buildings  Carry out energy audits to incentivize the uptake of energy efficiency and conservation; iimplement incentives for retro-fitting of existing buildings with more energy-efficient appliances  Designing and implementing guidelines and/or standards and regulations for design of new buildings  Gradual shift towards the use of cleaner energy technologies, such as LPG, efficient cook-stoves, among others to reduce the amount of fuel-wood used for cooking  Leapfrog to low global warming potential refrigerants.

To disseminate efficient stoves to reach a penetration rate of 30% in 2030;

To reduce progressively the use of wood for heating in order to reach 10% by 2030;

Launch energy-efficiency programs through establishing energy efficiency standards, energy use regulations and labelling and public awareness  Increased landfill CH4 recovery; waste incineration with energy recovery; composing of organic waste; controlled waste water treatment;

Train and raise awareness of stakeholders on waste issues.

Maintaining livestock population at appropriate levels according to the pasture carrying capacity;

Increase mechanization in agriculture leading to a reduction in numbers of draft cattle (and therefore lower methane emissions)  Gradual replacement of 100% of mineral fertilizers with organic fertilizers by 2030.

Forestry:  Improved afforestation; reforestation; forest management; reduced deforestation; harvested wood product management;

To achieve its conditional mitigation contribution, Lesotho may need to pursue some additional critical mitigation interventions as identified by stakeholders, and summarised in Table 5. Effectively, additional and improved mitigation measures may be identified in the future. In that case, more analysis will be undertaken to evaluate these options in more detail vis--vis the availability of funding support and internal capabilities. Table 5: Proposed additional mitigation action-based contributions: Conditional (CC), Unconditional (UC), Capacity Requirements (CR), Technology Requirements (TR) and Finance Requirements (FR).

Promote solar PV and use of energy efficient bulbs   Scale up SHS from approximately 5,000 in 2015 to 10,000 Installation of 10 solar PV mini-grids in rural communities with an average capacity of 100 kW each, which translates to 1 MW     Attain utility scale wind power capacity of up to 35 MW     Scale up adoption of LPG in peri-urban and rural households by 2030.     Scale up access and adoption of efficient cook-stoves by Develop national standards for alternative building materials and technologies;     Promote research in industrial technologies     Efficient lighting; more efficient electrical appliances and and active solar design for heating and cooling; alternative refrigeration fluids, recovery and recycling of fluorinated gases;

Agriculture Develop appropriate extension and training materials for climate resilient agronomic practices    Upscale afforestation, reforestation and forest conservation and protection of catchments     Upscale sustainable production of fuel wood by establishing woodlots plantations and forest management     Waste Landfill CH4 recovery; waste incineration with energy recovery; composting of organic waste; controlled wastewater treatment; recycling and waste minimisation;

Promote solid and water waste reduction practices at household, institutional and industry level to reduce waste generation Transport More fuel-efficient vehicles; Improving efficiency and emissions from existing vehicles through standards and capacity building Consider measures to restrict importation of vehicles that do not adhere to allowable emissions levels.     Cross-cutting Developing a robust national GHG inventory, a credible baseline and emissions trajectory, and a comprehensive MRV system.

The process of implementing the NDC is an opportunity to build institutional and technical capacities, stimulate policy integration and promote inclusive development. The national institutions necessary to implement the NDC programmes exist. The Ministry of Energy and Meteorology (MEM) is the coordinating agency charged with the responsibility of monitoring and reporting on weather, climate and climate change issues. In addition, MEM is the UNFCCC focal point. It coordinates the countrys actions on climate change through the (NCCC) that was formally established in 2013. The Committee is a multi-stakeholder forum chaired by the Ministry. It also serves as platform for information sharing on climate change issues in the country. The Ministry will function as the main body to monitor implementation of climate change adaptation projects, and identify emerging gaps and opportunities for further action.

Lesothos NDC is an ambitious, fair and responsible contribution to global efforts towards meeting the objective of the UNFCCC and the goal of limiting global average temperature rise to below 2.0C. The countrys proposed targets are ambitious, despite its status as a very vulnerable, small and landlocked least developed country with a fragile mountainous ecosystem and numerous pressing social and economic development needs and priorities. In order to maximise the ambition of its mitigation contribution while taking into account the need for economic development, Lesotho has prioritised mitigation actions that both address the main causes of future increases in emissions and also have significant development co- benefits. Therefore, we submit that these nationally determined contributions are fair and equitable commensurate to the national circumstances especially its low GDP per capita ( US$1,126) and the level of dependence on external support. Though Lesothos GHG emissions represent only 0.005% of global emissions and net per capita emissions, inclusive of all sectors, were 1.1 tCO2eq in 2015, it is highly vulnerable to climate change, particularly in the agriculture, energy and water sectors and has already experienced extreme weather shifts.

7.3 Monitoring and Evaluation System Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) is crucial for effective and efficient implementation of climate change adaptation activities at the national level. For all government programmes and projects implemented in the country, a monitoring and evaluation framework is in place. The M&E activities are undertaken by the Ministry of Development Planning (MoDP) in collaboration with sectoral ministries. The NDC M&E will be done by the MP, MEM and other sectoral ministries. LMS and NCCC will function as the main bodies to monitor implementation of climate change adaptation programmes/projects. Furthermore, the LMS and NCCC will identify emerging gaps and opportunities for further action. Government of Lesotho will require external technical and financial support to institute a tailor-made NDC tracking system to monitor short, medium and long term implementation.

7.4 Gaps, barriers and needs To achieve national resiliency to climate change, the NSDP has outlined the following strategies:

Integrating climate change into sectoral plans and programmes;  Climate proofing investments by upgrading standards for infrastructure development;  Improving access to climate change adaptation technology and use;  Improving environmental and climate change governance through undertaking vulnerability assessments and utilising them for medium to long-term forecasting, policy and planning.

Despite these noble aspirations, currently, the country does not have a long term national adaptation plan. Thus, there is an urgent need for financial support to complement the on- going adaptation initiatives. There is also a need to develop a long-term national adaptation plan and research.

7.4.1 Specific barriers to adaptation in Lesotho Lesotho faces a number of specific challenges in terms of addressing climate change. These challenges include, but are not limited to:  Technology transfer needs: Lack of tools and techniques hinder adaptation and mitigation to climate change. Limited national research capacity and technical analysis are some of the key barriers for technology development in Lesotho. There is insufficient technological capacity to undertake effective research on climate change modelling and risks, monitoring of climate change impacts and implementation of adaptation measures. To address these challenges, alliances and cooperation with overseas partners including development partners need to be continued. There is a need to design a national inventory system and to develop a framework for domestic Monitoring Reporting and Verification (MRV) of GHG emissions. There is a further need to access expertise and develop capacities for technology development and transfer.

Research and Monitoring: Climate action depends on the availability of high-quality scientific information. Climate data, science, information, and knowledge are critical elements in all facets of development under a changing climate. Many government sectoral plans and strategies have expressed the need for research and monitoring related to climate change adaptation and mitigation. However, there is lack of the human and financial resources to fully undertake this task. This call for the identification of innovative approaches and formulation of partnerships with academia (the University), local agencies and regional and international research institutions.

The impacts of climate change are more severe on sections of the society that are main dependant on natural resources for livelihoods and/or who have the least capacity to respond to natural hazards, such as droughts, landslides, floods and hurricanes. The majority of the worlds poor are women, as such they face higher risks and greater burdens from the impacts of climate change. Furthermore, womens unequal participation in decision-making processes and labour markets compound inequalities and often prevent women from fully contributing to climate-related planning, policy-making and implementation. The need to ensure equal engagement of women and men in all processes of the Convention as well as the need to develop and implement gender-responsive national climate change policies (which respond to the differentiated needs, experiences, priorities and capacities of women and men) is endorsed by the UNFCCC and enshrined in the Paris Agreement which states as thus:

Parties should when taking action to address climate change, respect, promote and consider their respective obligations on human rights, the right to health, the rights of indigenous peoples, local communities, migrants, children, persons with disabilities and people in vulnerable situations and the right to development, as well as gender equality, empowerment of women and intergenerational equity". In line with the aforementioned, Parties have to: a) Improve gender balance and increasing the participation of women in all UNFCCC processes, including in delegations and in bodies constituted under the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol, and b) Increase awareness and support for the development and effective implementation of gender-responsive climate policy at the regional, national and local levels. To this effect the adaptation interventions proposed in this NDC are meant to a) recognize and respond to the differentiated needs, experiences, priorities and capacities of women and men; b) enhance gender balance and inclusiveness in various adaptation programmes and projects.

7.6 Planning Process The Lesothos NDC is aligned with the national development goals, monitoring of SDGs and anchored in the National Energy Policy, forthcoming National Climate Change Policy and Strategy as well as the Sustainable Energy Strategy. It was developed though an inclusive and participatory process involving stakeholders who were engaged under the SNC processes, to provide inputs into the development of the GHG Inventory and Mitigation Assessment chapters and then through a validation exercise to seek national support for the proposed measures and targets. The effort received considerable technical support and guidance from UN Environment (UNEP) Technical University of Denmark (DTU) Partnership.

7.7 Review and Adjustment The NDC reflects the most recent data and information, analysis, and scenario for possible future. As a developing country, Lesotho will likely experience dynamic changes due to national and global economic changes. In this regards, the NDC will be reviewed and adjusted, as necessary, taking into account national circumstances, capacity and capability, and the provision under the Paris Agreement. Future research will be conducted in order to:

Quantify the required international financial, technological and capacity building support for the implementation of vulnerability abatement measures up to and beyond 2030;

Identify and quantify the technical support needed for the adequate integration of climate change adaptation considerations into existing and planned policies, strategies, plans, programmes and projects;

Identify the required technical support to quantify the cost of countering social, environmental and economic vulnerabilities that are likely to result from the adverse impacts of climate change.

