Update of Nationally Determined Contribution of Maldives Update of Nationally Determined Contribution of Maldives Climate change remains an existential threat to the Maldives. We are in fact, one of the most vulnerable events such as monsoonal heavy rains, storms, swells and coastal erosion.

GDP. Hence, without external support, the governments recovery efforts and build back better initiatives, which are aligned with long-tern emission reduction goals and resilient and green recovery may not be implemented successfully.

In our updated NDC we have made ambitious plans to reduce 26% of our emissions by 2030. Furthermore, we in the energy mix through various initiatives.

Island Initiative, launched by President H.E Ibrahim Mohamed Solih at the U.N. Climate Action Summit in 2019. one island, one reef and one wetland from each atoll in our country.

I am pleased to communicate to the international community this fulfillment from the Government and the People of Maldives.

The decision 1/CP.21 articulates, Also requests those Parties whose intended nationally determined contribution pursuant to decision 1/CP.20 contains a time frame up to 2030 to communicate or update the Agreement.

The Maldives submitted its first Nationally Determined Contribution in 2015. Since then, the Maldives has worked towards achieving the goals specified in the NDC. As per decision 1/CP.21, the Maldives submits its updated NDC. The Maldives made efforts as much as possible to enhance the NDC to follow the ICTU guidance which was adopted as a part of the Katowice Climate Package in December 2018 in the spirit of streamlining and harmonizing the NDCs synthesis process.

1. Quantified information on the reference point (including, as appropriate, a base year) Target is given relative to the projected emissions year of emissions.

Emissions in 2030 under a BAU is 3,284.92 Gg CO2e.

Increase supply and demand side efficiency.

Thilafushi and the interconnectivity bridge.

2010-2012.

Supply and Demand Survey 2010-2012.

Bureau of Statistics.

As per the IPCC guidelines:

Gases covered:

Maldives will account for any mitigation co-benefits Section 5.

(a) Information on the planning processes that the Party undertook to prepare its nationally determined contribution and, if available, on the Partys implementation plans, including, as private sector. In addition, the NDC was shared with considered.

5. Assumptions and methodological approaches, including those for estimating and accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and, as appropriate, removals adopted by the CMA;

See 5(a) above. The Maldives will also apply specific and measures in its future reporting.

For the purpose of projections:

6. How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light circumstances;

The target given is higher than the target submitted actions to be taken.

7. How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2:

The Maldives, as one of the most vulnerable countries to climate change, considers strengthening increasing the adaptation resilience is also considered economy wide and targets all the sectors.

The Maldives has a highly import oriented economy with respect to its staple food requirements. Moreover, the extensively scattered and geographically dispersed nature of islands results in tremendous systems especially during severe and extreme events and unexpected market irregularities.

Strengthen existing climate risk insurance mechanisms for building resilience against the loss of assets, livelihoods due to extreme events and enhancing relief efforts in the post disaster period taking into account national food and nutrition security.

Scale-up investments in building public food reserves and stocks and expanding regional distribution mechanisms across the country as an adaptive measure to increase accessibility and availability to reduce risks of food shortages during extreme events and market irregularities.  Promote research and development focusing on climate smart technologies and practices to address challenges facing the sector due to climate variabilities, seasonal changes and extreme events.

Enhance capacity to implement climate smart and Integrated Pest Management (IPM) strategies and practices towards reducing pest damages and pest induced crop losses to increase resilience  Facilitate and enhance access to finance via available national funds and other mechanisms including access to micro-credit, grants etc., to increase farmers capacity to enhance food security and to increase investments on production systems.

Given the small and low lying geographic nature of the islands, our critical infrastructure is in close proximity to the coast. Infrastructure is constantly exposed to coastal hazards such as sea swells, storm surges and associated coastal flooding. This infrastructure needs protection from the potential adverse impacts of climate change. As part of increasing infrastructure resiliency, the Maldives will consider to undertake the following actions.

Enhancing the resilience and climate proofing of critical infrastructure such as airports, ports, powerhouses and other utilities etc.

Enhancing the National Building Code to incorporate climate resilience including coastal infrastructure.

Increase resiliency through better spatial planning and increased connectivity between the islands.

Strengthen the legislative framework by establishment of a National Planning Act and Physical Planning Act. The legislation will facilitate integration of climate change into development planning while considering the economies of scale for public services, land use planning and population consolidation.

Strengthen efforts to conserve and restore mangrove ecosystems considering its numerous services and benefits to people and nature including livelihood of communities and its role as natural buffers or barriers for flood mitigation.

Climate Change has both direct and indirect health impacts. Warmer temperatures and wetter monsoon seasons could increase the prevalence of vector borne diseases. Extreme weather such as storm surges emergencies. These impacts are not limited to physical diseases, but also affects mental and social well- being. This often has a disproportionate burden on women, elderly persons, persons with disabilities and children.

Food and water borne diseases are not common in the Maldives. However, heavy rainfall and flooding promotes the transmission of such pathogens when there are no proper mechanisms to ensure adequate food safety and disposal measures. Poor sanitation and groundwater contamination also increase the chance of spreading water borne diseases.

Facilitate integration of climate change into the national health systems to ensure sustainable and climate resilient adaptation measures.

Enhance the institutional and human capacity to implement the existing vector surveillance programs covering all islands to address the emergence and re-emergence of such diseases and in implementing adequate food safety measures.

Strengthen the existing legal frameworks to address national vector control and implementation of food safety policies and standards.

Enhance the resilience of health infrastructure through increased climate proofing and incorporating green and energy efficiency measures.

Enhance public health advocacy and awareness activities to reduce vector borne and other non- communicable diseases including those driven by heat stress and poor air quality.

Promote research to understand the nexus between climate change and health such as its impacts on vector borne diseases, mental health and air quality.

Ground and rainwater are the main sources of fresh water in Maldives. In most of the islands, groundwater is not suitable for potable use due to saltwater intrusion and poor water quality. Future climate projections show that Maldives will experience issues with adequate availability of rain water which increases risk to accessibility and quality of water sources.

Implementation of cost-effective Integrated Water Resource Management (IWRM) systems to cater for the water needs of the entire population to reduce the risk of water shortages during dry seasons.

Enhance decentralized water security and safety plans to be implemented in all islands, considering the nuanced differences of the available water resources and minimize the detrimental impacts on the water resources.

Integrate stormwater management into infrastructure development projects.

Improve the overall understanding of impacts from climate change on the natural water resources based on the latest science and implement policies, standards, regulations to pre- emptively protect the natural water resources from future impacts.

Strengthen policies, programmes and campaigns to increase the efficiency of water use to reduce human pressure on the existing water resources.

Promote use of evidence-based decision making on coastal adaptation planning and management of coastal zones.

Facilitate mobilization of financing to reduce exposure of communities to coastal hazards.  Mainstream climate change risks into coastal development policies.

Continue to facilitate investments in coastal protection of inhabited islands, industrial islands and resorts.

Maldives biodiversity. The formation and protection of islands, livelihoods of the people and economy of the country depends on our marine environment in particular the coral reefs, with their immense livelihoods to island communities.

This vital ecosystem is highly sensitive to changing sea surface temperature and other climatic factors. Evidence from Maldivian reefs supports that warming of the ocean surface leads to significant coral bleaching and mortality has been observed in the Maldives due to El-Nino phenomenon during the past two decades. In some instances, coral reefs surrounding the islands are also stressed due to land-based sources of pollution.

Facilitate research to address knowledge gaps and climate change impacts on coral reefs and marine ecosystems in order to promote sustainable and resilience-based management of coral reefs and marine ecosystems.

Strengthen existing coral reef monitoring program by engaging partners and stakeholders and developing tools (such as remote sensing, projections) for predicting, measuring and monitoring effects of climate variabilities and changes on reefs, marine ecosystems and vulnerable species.  Strengthen national conservation programs considering different categories of protection, local and community management, ecosystem-based approach to contribute to the conservation of marine and coastal biodiversity and increase their resilience to climate change impacts while taking the livelihoods of the resource users into account.

Enhance resilience of coral reefs and ecosystems by developing policy tools, incorporating into development plans, promoting best practices, increasing advocacy and through management actions.

Implement measures to reduce sources of pollution on coral reefs and ecosystems especially marine life through appropriate policies, development of appropriate treatment facilities, management and safe disposal of solid waste taking into account the timely phasing-out of single use plastics.

Tourism is the largest contributor to GDP. The Maldivian tourism industry is highly dependent on its national GDP.

Mainstream climate change risks into tourism sector policies to enhance resiliency and sustainability of the sector.

Facilitate access to finance to increase the resilience and sustainable environmental management of the sector.

Mainstream and promote clean energy and energy efficiency technologies to reduce the overall emissions.

Establish an insurance mechanism to reduce the impacts on the tourism sector through risk sharing and risk management.

Fisheries remains the primary industry for many island communities occupying men and women alike. Fish products are the countrys main exports and is one of the key sources of foreign exchange. Fisheries is also a key primary productivity sector and contributes to approximately 20% of the domestic employment.

Climate change is expected to have a profound impact on oceans and marine life and the Maldives is no exception. The changing distribution of fish stocks and their food due to climate variability and accelerating effects of climate change is expected to have a significant impact on Maldives fisheries, frequency and magnitude of extreme events and anomalies could be devastating to the fishing communities nutritionally and economically.

Facilitate fisheries research and development initiatives taking into consideration resilience building of the sector towards managing the changing of fish stocks and its migration patterns, adapting to efficient technologies and investing in national capacity needs.

Enhance diversification of the fisheries sector including promotion of multi-functionality to respond to the emerging challenges and uncertainties due to climate variabilities and extreme events while protecting the health and sustainability of the marine resources and ecosystems.  Promote sustainable fisheries by increasing efficiency of fishing vessels, promoting technologies that have potential for reducing GHGs and by developing and upgrading land based fisheries infrastructures and facilities for a low carbon foot- print.

Facilitate access to finance to empower the industry towards meeting the vulnerability challenges and increase its contribution to sustainable blue growth considering vulnerable small- scale fishers and fishing communities and their productive role in maintaining food and nutrition security, livelihood and sustaining a successful blue economy.

Strengthen insurance schemes to enhance resilience of small-scale fishers and fishing industry to cover against losses due to extreme events and anomalies, ensuring a minimum monthly income for lost fishing days especially for small-scale fishers.

Promote research to understand past and future climate trends and their associated impacts.  Continue strengthening and expansion of the meteorological network and early warning systems to cover the entire archipelago.

Improve the climate and weather forecasting tools for decision making.

Strengthen the early warning systems and risk management tools.

The Maldives is highly vulnerable to natural disasters and extreme climate events due to its fragile ecological profile and low elevation. Communities have experienced extensive damages in recent times, due to strong winds and frequent flooding. Future climate projections indicate that extreme events are likely to be more severe and frequent. Respective authorities and communities need to be better prepared to address and manage natural disasters.

Strengthen the existing databases on disaster risk management.

Strengthen collaboration with the island communities to understand and obtain information on local impacts.

Enhance mechanisms for collection of information on losses and damages.

Facilitate the promotion and participation of the public and private sector in the disaster insurance scheme.

The Government of Maldives will actively seek ways to increase both public and private resources for climate action. To this end, the Maldives will continue to forge partnerships with individuals, private sector, civil society and local governments to mobilize climate finance. The government has been under the Public Sector Investment Programme, recurring budgetary contributions, local contributions for donor supported projects, and loan repayments. In addition, the government continues to spearhead efforts to mobilize additional climate finance through innovative financing mechanisms, direct investments in projects, and provision of loans and guarantees to attract private finance to achieve its climate goals. The Maldives will continue to enhance its enabling environments to attract climate finance.

Review and update the National Strategic Framework to Mobilize International Climate Finance every five years, outlining priority areas for donor support.

Improve governments capacity to tap into international climate finance mechanisms.  Establish and operationalize a system for tracking public and private climate finance flows.  Scale up annual budgetary allocations for climate adaptation and mitigation through the Public Sector Investment programme.

Establish a National Climate Change Trust Fund to attract investments and to implement a range of alternative financing mechanisms for increasing resilience and low emission development programmes.

Continue allocations from the Maldives Green Fund to finance investments on climate action.  Introduce incentives for private sector including SMEs to invest in green development.

Implementation of NDC and other climate related policies requires the necessary capacity and good governance mechanism. Addressing climate change adaptation and mitigation needs transformational changes. These changes need proper knowledge transfer, human resource capacity building, and increasing public awareness in addition to the financial and technological enhancements.  Mainstream climate considerations into national development planning processes.

With support from the international community, develop the National Adaptation Plan (NAP) with short, medium and long-term adaptation programs to address adaptation needs nationwide.

Strengthen climate governance through enactment of the climate change legislation.  Continue the national capacity building programs with assistance from the international community.

Develop and promote appropriate technologies to address climate change impacts with support from the international community.

Implement appropriate policies and strategies to address the impacts of climate change on vulnerable groups.

