Cover page image: The demise of Namibias oldest and largest trees, the baobabs, some of which have lived for 1,700 years, have begun dying in the last 15 years, because of climate change. The fingerprints represent Namibias unique environment and biodiversity which identifies the country. Namibia is home to two global biodiversity hotspots (Succulent Karoo floral kingdom and the Namib escarpment) which also happen to be home to a vast array of endemic plants, animals, and other organisms. Notably, Namibia is home to the worlds largest cheetah population and many impressive environmental features, including the oldest desert in the world and Africas largest river canyon.

In addition to these challenges, we are now tackling a range of global challenges that also threaten our capacity to cope and our desire to achieve sustainable growth. This is clear from the current COVID-19 pandemic, which has further intensified our vulnerability to external shocks. Thus, without external assistance, the government's recovery strategies and stronger policies cannot be efficiently enforced. Despite these challenges, and while our contribution to GHG emissions is just climate problem facing the world today.

Our NDC puts equal emphasis on further improving our adaptation and developing future climate resilience to reduce climate threats to our populations and their livelihoods. Our contribution to achieving resilient growth is evidenced by a range of ongoing projects, such as the Community Based Adaptation programmes focusing on agricultural and pastoral communities in the north-central and far northeast region of the country, undertaking community-based projects to build resilience to climate change by increasing resilience against climate-induced land degradation. Also, this NDC will encourage efforts to achieve the government's vision for a 'green economy' that encourages balanced economic development while safeguarding our environment.

Several stakeholder consultations and reviews of ongoing initiatives, partnerships and programmes in various sectors are part of this revised NDC. Efforts were also made to ensure that this NDC is aligned with all the strategies, plans and visions of the Republic of Namibia. Namibia is committed to achieving a climate-resilient and low-emission pathway.

On behalf of the Government and the People of Namibia, I am delighted to present this document as our resolve to do our part in the fulfilment of our national obligations to the UNFCCC and the international community at DEGREE Demonstration Gobabeb of Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Table 5.1. Institutional arrangements for Namibias NDC MRV management: Responsibilities and roles in taking practical and ambitious action to reduce emissions and ensure mechanism and enhanced data. This report provides an update on the latest policies, measures and actions that will drive significant emission reductions whilst promoting a climate-resilient Namibia. The updated NDC presents a progressive shift above the 2015 pledge to reduce emissions from 89% to 91% by 2030.

Namibia's mitigation commitment is in the form of a decrease in GHG emissions compared to the Business as Usual (BAU) baseline over the 2015-2030 period. This update presents an improvement in the commitment of the devotion of Namibia to meeting the Paris Agreement goal and following the road to net zero emissions by 2050.

In the energy sector, the national sustainable energy strategy of Namibia looks to introduce new emissions- reducing technologies and encourage healthier practices that are more energy efficient.1 The updated NDC includes climate-friendly and energy-efficient refrigeration and air conditioning (RAC). Low Global Warming Potential technology options, particularly technology with natural refrigerants, exist as an alternative to HFCs for almost any RAC appliance. In the AFOLU sector, the main driver of the 2030 goal is to reduce the deforestation rate. The next 10 years will see a decrease in CO2 equivalents by over 13.5 MtCO2e. Namibia has acknowledged that reforestation, agroforestry and urban forests are vital to both carbon and timber productivity through best forest management practices. Under the waste sector, energy utilisation measures such as Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) transformation into compost and electricity are the most important opportunities.

In the BAU scenario, overall GHG emissions in 2030 are expected to rise by up to 24.167 MtCO2e. The estimated emissions reduction will be 21.996 MtCO2e through 2030 (91% reduction of which 78.7% is from the AFOLU) (Table ES-1).

Table ES-1. Sectoral share and percentage of BAU GHG emissions in 2030.

Sector Mitigation potential (MtCO2e) % Reduction compared to BAU scenario in 2030 emissions by 2030.

Adaption is still a relevant feature in Namibia and the country is considered one of the most vulnerable countries to the impacts of climate change. The country is particularly vulnerable to flooding and droughts. Ministries with adaptation relevance proposed a total of 49 priority actions.

The agriculture, tourism and fisheries sectors are especially critical for adaptation, and several ministries have set goals for both youth and women's participation. Therefore, in Namibia, we see gender-balanced training and the promotion of the youth and women as relevant.

Means of implementation.

The projected net cost of the NDC mitigation measures to be implemented in Namibia is expected to be approximately USD 3.61 billion by 2030 and more than USD 1.72 billion for adaptation targets, representing a total funding need of approximately USD 5.33 billion (or NAD 77 billion). Table ES-2 outlines the estimated funding requirements and conditions for the updated NDC. The unconditional measures comprise about 10 per cent of the total expected funding and 90 per cent for the conditional measures. The funding pool would constitute a mix of national and international funding.

TABLE ES-2. ESTIMATED MITIGATION AND ADAPTATION FINANCE NEEDED.

Namibia has institutional reporting arrangements in place. The National Climate Change Committee and its sub- working groups will oversee and track the implementation of the updated NDC. Namibia is currently developing a robust transparency reporting system on its NDC and this would be a final instrument for the national MRV system. The new MRV systems will enable the country to monitor the effectiveness of its mitigation and adaptation measures including access to the means of implementation particularly climate finance.

Agreement reflects its continued adherence to the goals of the Paris Agreement, to keep the rise in global average temperature well below 2oC above pre-industrial levels.

In 2015 the Namibian Government submitted its ambitious NDC with a pledge to reduce its national emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs) by 89% by 2030. Since then, the Parties have agreed to announce a new round of enhanced NDCs. Hence Namibia has taken this major step to raise its mitigation ambition from 89% in 2015 to 91%.

Namibia commits to reduce its GHG emissions conditionally by 14% (under limited domestic and international support) and towards 77% (with substantial international support) in 2030 compared to the Business As Usual levels, corresponding to a total reduction by 21.996 MtCO2e. Namibia is committed to combating climate change and accelerating the transition to a climate-resilient, low-carbon sustainable mode of development. Namibia continues to play a part in an effective global response to climate change. Namibia is to implement an economy-wide target to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from 91 per cent below 2015 levels by 2030. The general statement by most countries is to agree to the Talanoa Dialogue2, which states that there should be no backsliding but progression over time. Namibia endorses the Talanoa Dialogue's commitment to no backsliding in this matter. The details of Namibias new contribution are going to be set out in this updated NDC to aid transparency, clarity and understanding.

1.2 A fair and ambitious contribution to achieve the Conventions objective Namibia's second updated nationally determined contribution is an ambitious, fair and reasonable contribution to the global efforts to fight climate change. The target is a significant progression above Namibias 2015 commitment. In this updated NDC Namibia aims to reduce emissions by 91 per cent below 2030 BAU levels.

Namibia has put in place a National Climate Change Policy of 2011 and the National Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan 2013-2020 (NCCSAP), aimed at building the country's adaptive and mitigative capacities by to BAU (24.167 MtCo2e).

The NCCSAP will be replaced by the NDC Implementation Strategy and Action Plan for 2021-2030. This document will clarify national goals and objectives regarding climate change and lay out a plan for implementing, reporting and monitoring a series of priority activities to implement the updated NDC.

The present existing structure for the implementation of climate change activities consists of a multi-sectoral NCCC which oversees the implementation and coordination of sector-specific and cross-sectoral NDC activities while also providing advice and guidance on them. The NCCC reports to Cabinet through the NPC while the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Economics, Natural Resources and Public Administration advises Cabinet on relevant policy matters for the INDC also3. The MET, which is responsible for all environmental issues in the country and is the National Focal Point to the UNFCCC and reports on NDC activities to the UNFCCC. MET monitors, tracks and follows COP decisions on NDCs, including funding possibilities, and transmits these to the concerned institutions. Sectoral activities rest with the respective Ministries through their concerned Directorates.

The Namibian Government and development stakeholders have come together to join forces in delivering on the country's commitments to advance the Paris Agreement. A newly developed Partnership Plan connects international resources for climate mitigation and adaptation to five priority areas set by the government and builds a community around climate action in Namibia.

Building off progress already made through Namibia's existing climate plans and policies, the Namibia NDC Partnership Plan identifies priority areas set by the government for implementation of its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) under the Paris Agreement. The Plan takes ongoing action into account but, more importantly, looks to the future for development partners to deliver on their responsibility in supporting the global south to fight climate change.

The priority areas set by the Government, and supported by the development community, private sector and others include4:

Development of better framework conditions for effective climate change governance.

Strengthening financing of projects that help reduce emissions and enhancing the country's resilience against the effects of climate change.

Tracking progress toward greenhouse gas emission reduction targets.

Strengthening coordination across national and international stakeholders to fast-track decisions and interagency collaboration.

Several members of the NDC Partnership have already pledged to support Namibias ambitions through the Partnership Plan, including the African Development Bank, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the French Development Agency (AfD), the European Commission, the Federal Republic of Germany (through GIZ and KfW), the United Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and World Resources Institute. Several Namibian banks, including the Namibia Development Bank and NedBank, have shown strong interest in investing in climate-smart projects. A growing community of development partners, private sector and government institutions is pulling together behind for the need to address climate impacts to achieve global climate goals.5 Namibia has embraced the NDC Partnerships integrated planning process to strengthen coordination, resource mobilisation and transparency on NDC implementation.

1.5 Namibias Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation : Policy and Planning Namibia developed a national climate change strategy and action plan for the period 2013-2020, with two mitigation themes: sustainable energy and prioritized low carbon development, and transportation. Namibia has placed more focus on adaptation that is currently implemented under four key critical themes, that is, food security and sustainable biological resources; sustainable water resources base; human health and wellbeing; and infrastructure development. Namibia has placed more focus on adaptation that is currently implemented under four key critical themes, that is, food security and sustainable biological resources; sustainable water resources base; human health and wellbeing; and infrastructure development.

Awareness-raising efforts are a key feature of reaching the goals of Namibias climate change policy. As such, cross-sectoral and multi-stakeholder initiatives, such as this collaboration, are significant to support education and public awareness for adapting to and mitigating the impacts of climate change and continuing to oversee the implementation of these activities in line with the Harambee Prosperity Plan.6 Namibias Vision 2030 document adopts a strategic approach for long-term sustainable development. Namibia acknowledges that climate change impacts directly the entire chain of national development and is likely to have negative impacts on efforts to achieve development objectives, including the long-term objectives and targets of Namibias Vision 2030. The goal of the NPCC has been to contribute to the attainment of sustainable development in line with Namibias Vision 2030 through the strengthening of national capacities to reduce climate change risk and build resilience for any climate change shocks. Namibias long-term development vision, Vision 2030 aims to achieve a prosperous and industrialised Namibia.7 Actions on reducing current and future emissions include using renewable energy sources and energy-efficient technology among many other actions. Mitigation is rooted in the transition to move toward a low-carbon development path taking into consideration Namibias long-term Vision 2030.

5 (UNDP, 2018) 6 (Republic of Namibia, 2016a) 7 (Office of the President, 2004) atmosphere because our planet is at stake8. Namibia fully supports the goals of COP21. That is why, during the Harambee period, Namibia is targeting a primarily renewable energy mix. The International Community is called upon to support Namibia in financing renewable energy9.

The Plan does not replace but complements the long-term goal of the National Development Plans [NDPs] and Vision 2030. HPP introduces an element of flexibility in the Namibian planning system by fast-tracking development in areas where progress is insufficient. It also incorporates new development opportunities and aims to address challenges that have emerged after the formulation of NDPs.

For the first time in a National Development Plan (NDP5), Namibia included an intermediate emissions reduction target (Greenhouse gas emissions 30% reduction against Business As Usual projection, by 2022). This target is a carbon budget which the country can spend in diverse ways by allocating emission rights and commitments among those sectors most responsible for greenhouse gas emissions. The target is an important signal for private stakeholders and potential investors, giving them the incentive to find mitigation opportunities. NDP5 targets10 are subject to domestic monitoring and annual reporting: The Government of Namibia will necessarily follow an emission monitoring and reporting system based on the rules of the Paris Agreement (which were agreed at COP24). The transition to low carbon and climate-resilient economy offers considerable opportunities to address challenges such as energy and water insecurity. Namibia will seek to aggressively mobilize funding for innovation in these areas through multilateral financing mechanisms such as the Green Climate Fund and Global Environment Facility, and through bilateral relationships and partnerships with the private sector.

Ensuring buy-in and ownership of the final strategy by key ministries, departments and agencies, along with non-governmental stakeholders, is crucial. Their visible and felt support and participation are vital if long- term strategies are to be influential in guiding short, medium as well as long-term planning and investment decisions across all societal levels. The overall objective is to initiate an effective and just transition to a low greenhouse gas emission and resilient future.

This will require; involvement of political leadership at the highest level, the creation of institutional arrangements for long-term planning, supportive legal frameworks and stakeholder engagement. It is envisaged that a shared vision will be realised and that all these constituencies will be effectively harmonised in the implementation of the long-term strategy.

8 (Republic of Namibia, 2016a) 9 (Republic of Namibia, 2016b) 10 (NPC, 2017) The mitigation contribution from Namibia is in the form of a reduction in GHG emissions compared to a business- as-usual (BAU) baseline over the period 2015-2030. This update presents an increase in the ambition of Namibias11 commitment to achieving the objective of the Paris Agreement and in line with a path to net-zero emissions by 2050.12 To drive this ambition over time, the Paris Agreement contains an ambition mechanism or ratcheting mechanism. This requires countries to submit an updated NDC, with a progression from previous submissions (i.e. no backsliding), reflecting the highest possible ambition given their national circumstances.

The preparation of the INDC report focused mainly on existing policies, strategies and action plans developed and currently being implemented. In the preparation of this second update report, the focus is on broadening the existing mitigation and adaptation strategies, on the basis that the new actions will yield positive results in both mitigation and adaptation areas while benefiting other sectors of the economy at large. This NDC update improves the first NDC, on comprehensive scientific review and robust stakeholder involvement. Detailed sector- based modelling for mitigation has now been conducted to evaluate the mitigation potential and to develop quantified conditional and unconditional commitments by 2030.

Namibia shall account for its nationally determined contributions. In accounting for anthropogenic emissions and removals corresponding to its nationally determined contributions, the country shall promote environmental integrity, transparency, accuracy, completeness, comparability, consistency, and ensure the avoidance of double counting. This is in line with the guidelines adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Agreement.

Baseline scenarios defined in this updated NDC are presented as a future projected reference level of emissions against which a goal has been established or progress is to be measured. The mitigation contributions presented in this updated NDC are based on achieving a relative GHG emissions reduction through 2015-2030. Baseline scenarios used in this report demonstrate emissions that would have occurred in the absence of certain mitigation policies. Baselines can also be used as a reference to set a target (target baselines); this updated NDC will focus on baseline targets as communicated within Parties. The baseline scenarios were built on Key Assumptions linked to driving variables such as GDP, industrial output, population, consumption, investment etc.

Namibias NDC target has been expressed in relation to the baseline scenario. The first NDC for Namibia expressed its baseline target as unconditionally reducing 89% of its GHGs below BAU for 2030. Similarly, in this updated NDC, a baseline target was used to express Namibias mitigation response relative to a counterfactual baseline scenario under which certain emissions reductions and associated policies (that could have a direct or indirect effect on emissions) do not take place. Accounting for baseline targets thus depends on a clear understanding of the baseline scenario. Namibia is providing this information to give greater clarity, transparency and understanding of its baseline and thus, the baseline target, which will facilitate greater understanding of its NDCs, and progress towards and achievement of the mitigation target (Table 2.1).

TABLE 2.1. FURTHER INFORMATION FOR CLARITY ON BASELINE TARGET (MITIGATION).

Accounting method: Relative to base year/period emissions. Compares changes in emissions relative to past performance.

AFOLU sector.

National objectives and priorities  data sources:

Communications, sector-specific analyses.

TABLE 2.2. TYPES OF INFORMATION USEFUL FOR CONTRIBUTIONS INCLUDING ADAPTATION COMPONENTS.

TYPE OF INFORMATION PURPOSE OF INFORMATION EXAMPLES OF DATA SOURCES Report; academic research;

National planning documents;

National planning documents;

(sector, location, etc.) assessments;

To inform the NDC update process, the Namibian Ministry of Environment, Forestry and Tourism has compiled existing analysis on the sectoral composition of emissions, projected GHG emissions through 2030, sectoral mitigation actions in the sectoral plans, and possible co-benefits, among other issues. Based on this analysis, Namibia prioritised additional data needs in the agriculture, forestry, and other land uses (AFOLU) sectors. The process used all the data to build an economy-wide business-as-usual scenario as well as to assess various mitigation scenarios and their impacts in the NDC update design process (Table 2.2).

Namibias GHG inventory data in the base year 2015 are shown in Table 2.3 according to IPCC reporting categories for all GHG emissions sources. Total emissions from all the sectors excluding forestry were estimated at 4.22 MtCO2e for 2015. Total national emissions increased by 1.7% over the period 2010 - 2015. The AFOLU sector remained the leading emitter throughout this period followed by Energy, for all years under review.

TABLE 2.3. NATIONAL GHG EMISSIONS (MT, CO-EQ) BY SECTOR (2010 - 2015).14 Note: The area graphs show the trend in emissions from 2010 to 2015 for the 4 IPCC sectors and total emissions.

In this updated NDC, baseline scenarios are defined as a future projected reference level of emissions against which a goal has been established or progress is to be measured. The mitigation contributions in this updated NDC are based on a relative decrease in GHG emissions from 2015 to 2030. The baseline scenarios included in this report depict emissions that would have occurred if specific mitigation strategies had not been implemented. Baselines can also be used to set an objective ("target baselines").

Namibia's first NDC stated its baseline target as unconditionally reducing its GHGs below BAU by 2030. Similarly, a baseline target was used in this updated NDC to express Namibia's mitigation response relative to a counterfactual baseline scenario in which certain emissions reductions and associated policies (that could have a direct or indirect effect on emissions) do not occur. Namibia is providing this information to improve the clarity, transparency, and understanding of its baseline.

In the BAU scenario, overall GHG emissions in 2030 are expected to rise by up to 24.167 MtCO2e. The estimated emissions reduction under the NDC scenario will be approximately 21.996 MtCO2e in 2030 (91% reduction of which 78.7% is from the AFOLU) (Table 2.4).

TABLE 2.4. SUMMARY OF BAU EMISSIONS AND NDC EMISSIONS REDUCTION.

Sector Mitigation potential (MtCO2e) % Reduction compared to BAU scenario in 2030 The total mitigation potential is estimated at around 21.996 MtCO2e in 2030 compared to BAU emissions in the same year of 24.167 MtCO2e (Figure 2.1). According to the analysis, mitigation measures identified within the AFOLU sector account for the highest proportion (approximately 79%) (Table 2.4) compared to other sectors.

FIGURE 2.1. MITIGATION CONTRIBUTION AGAINST BUSINESS-AS-USUAL (BAU).

Figure 2.1 illustrates the emission projections for the BAU scenario and Namibias mitigation contribution for all measures (unconditional and conditional). By 2030 avoided emissions are estimated to be around 21.996 MtCO2e, representing a reduction against BAU of around 91% (figures are given in Table 2.4.). With no measures, emissions are estimated to total around 24.167 MtCO2e, equal to 8% more than the mitigation scenario by 2030.

Figure 2.2 summarises the estimated emissions reduction potential in 2030 for all mitigation measures assessed from the long list of all mitigation measures presented in appendix 1. The pie charts indicate the relative contribution made from measures within the key sectors of energy (electricity generation and transport), IPPU (Cement industry and RAC), AFOLU (forestry), waste (solid waste transformation and recycling), against the BAU baseline described above.

FIGURE 2.2. MITIGATION POTENTIAL FROM ALL MITIGATION MEASURES.

Commercial refrigeration (Stand-alone equipment) - switch to R290 (propane) and In the energy sector, Namibias National Renewable Energy Policy aims to drive emerging technologies that reduce emissions and support cleaner practices. The goal is the substitution of existing higher emission technologies with cleaner, more efficient, and lower-cost technologies. Namibias efforts in renewables will contribute to a 30% reduction equivalent in the quantity (2.668 TWh) of electricity imported in 2018 which would result in 0.8 TWh (800 GWh) in new RE generation of 330 MW of Solar PV per annum until 2030. Further measures that will build on Namibias existing efforts include fuel switching to replace inefficient fuels with cleaner and economical alternatives, such as substituting hydrocarbons for hydrogen or electric energy.

Complimented by modern equipment upgrades, fuel switching is a simple approach that Namibia will use in reducing energy consumption and costs for end-users, while also curbing carbon emissions. Fuel economy (FE) and greenhouse gas (GHG) emission standards regulations will be used as one of the main instruments available to Namibia to achieve significant improvements in fuel consumption and GHG emissions from light-duty vehicles (LDVs). These standards through continued development and application of fuel-efficient technologies will reduce carbon emissions by 3% of total GHG emissions. Over the years by 2030, Namibias adoption of such standards will result in a market transformation towards vehicles that are increasingly fuel-efficient-consuming less fuel per kilometre driven and thus emitting less GHG.

The total mitigation potentials of the RAC sector are essential to Namibia's mitigation options including both direct and indirect emission reductions through climate-friendly refrigeration and air conditioning. Emissions of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) used as refrigerants are addressed by the commitments made under the Kigali Amendment of the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer which have been ratified by the Republic of Namibia in May 2019. To prevent lock-in of highly climate-damaging HFC refrigerants in the time between now and the first Kigali Amendment phase-down step in 2029, the Republic of Namibia aims to implement early action on the reduction of HFCs and the introduction of climate-friendly alternatives. Low GWP Methane net zero emissions by 2050 (achieve 75% of the target by 2030), 32% technology options, particularly natural refrigerant technology options, exist as an alternative to HFCs for almost any RAC appliance. Namibia aims at the introduction of climate-friendly and energy-efficient appliances through the inclusion of a ban on high GWP equipment and the introduction of minimum energy performance standards (MEPS) that generate emission reductions, both from the use of refrigerants (direct emissions) and from low energy consumption (indirect emissions). The measures aim to achieve a penetration of 60% climate- friendly and energy-efficient residential air conditioners, as well as domestic and commercial refrigeration units by 2030. This will be accomplished by switching from inefficient HFC-based equipment to energy-efficient natural refrigerant-based equipment.

These measures are complemented by training technicians on the proper servicing and handling of low GWP refrigerants. They are to be also trained in the safe and proper disposal of old refrigerators as well as car air conditioning equipment. The mitigation potential for HFC emissions is projected to be 0.031 MtCO2e in 2030. Significant indirect (energy-related) mitigation potential exists, i.e. around 0.048 MtCO2e in 2030. However, the resulting emissions will be accounted for under the Energy sectors.

TABLE 2.5. SUMMARY OF ESTIMATED GHG MITIGATION POTENTIAL FROM ALL MEASURES.

Electricity generation:

1) Renewable Energy Feed-in Tariff (REFIT) 70 MW PV - replacing imports plus Ruacana 0.246 1.12 4) Solar power - Omburu 20 MW PV - replacing imports & 20 MW Solar IPP Power Plant 0.014 0.06 5) Wind power - Luderitz Wind 40 MW replacing imports & 50 MW Wind IPP Power Plant 0.022 0.05 Transport:

9) Promote passenger vehicle fuel efficiency standards (in 80 % of total passenger vehicle population) 11) Fuel switching to low-carbon fuels - Hydrogen replacing diesel 0.946 3.59 Industry:

Refrigeration and Air Conditioning (Climate-friendly and energy-efficient alternatives):

14) Split residential air conditioners  switch to R290 (propane) 0.015 0.07 15) Car air conditioning  safe disposal of old car ACs 0.0002 0.001 16) Domestic refrigeration - R600a (isobutane) and safe disposal of old refrigerators 0.001 17) Commercial refrigeration (Stand-alone equipment)  switch to R290 (propane) and R744 (CO2) and safe disposal of old equipment 0.003 18) Commercial refrigeration (Condensing units)  switch to R290 (propane) and R744 (CO2) and safe disposal of old equipment 0.011 22) Plant 10,000 ha of trees per year under Agroforestry 0.358 1.63 25) Increase Recycling of plastic waste and e-waste by 70% 0.0016 0.01 26) Zero waste by 2050 through re-use and recycling (75% of target achieved by 2030) Approximately 8.9% or about 7,290,000 ha of Namibia is forested and reducing the deforestation rate by 75% from 0.9% per year to below 0.25% will be the major drive to achieving the 2030 target (Figure 2.2). More effort and investment are being put in place by Namibia to achieve this goal in Namibias forest areas. Over 13.5 Mt CO2 equivalent will be mitigated in the next 10 years. Namibia recognises that reforestation, agroforestry, and urban forestry are key emissions reduction strategies (Table 2.5). Through the restoration of 15.5 million hectares of degraded savanna, it is expected that 2.3 Mt CO2 equivalent will be reduced from total emissions in 2030 (Table 2.5). The central parts of the country are covered by thornbush savanna, which is increasingly being encroached by indigenous woody bush species. This is considered a serious form of land degradation, adversely impacting biodiversity, groundwater recharge and land productivity as well as accessibility for eco-tourism activities. In total, it is estimated that in total 45 million hectares are affected by woody encroachment at varying intensities.

Namibias land sector is reported as a large net sink and will remain so even in the scenario of increased bush biomass harvest. Even the largest upscaling scenarios of bush biomass utilization are not expected to compromise this terrestrial sink. Furthermore, the net impact of bush thinning in combination with the restoration of savanna rangelands is still subject to further research, especially with regards to changes in soil organic carbon. While the mitigation impact of bush thinning and rangeland restoration has not been determined conclusively, the climate change adaptation benefits of these measures are undisputed and manifold. Although Namibias land sector is very much likely to remain a sink, it may become CO2 neutral under the scenario of increased harvest and use of the invader bush. The assumptions made when calculating emissions for the BAU scenario for the Land sector which governs mitigation are:

National programmes for the protection of Forest lands in the north-eastern regions are deemed to reduce deforestation to a strict minimum with a loss of 7500 hectares annually.

Other wooded land (OWL)15 will also stabilize as woody encroachment into grassland in the central and southern part of the country is estimated to be not occurring due to rainfall being limiting.

With no further encroachment of woody species occurring, the Grassland area of 3.8 million ha will remain the same. The utilisation of the encroacher bush in OWL is not expected to affect this land class as it will be primarily bush thinning as opposed to a full clearing.

Settlements area will increase marginally by 100 ha on an annual basis from OWL as inclusion from Cropland or Grassland is estimated not to occur.

The area of Wetlands and Other lands is estimated to remain stable.

The targeted national mitigation contribution from the AFOLU sector is expected to result from the implementation of different strategies that relate mainly to natural forest management (reforestation and urban forestry) and agroforestry, either with domestic or international support. The total area of intervention is expected to reach 15,000 ha with merely domestic support and 20,000 ha with international support.

The potential mitigation contribution from Agroforestry, represented by the total C storage of trees outside natural forest lands estimated at 0.358 MtCO2e. However, this figure is a total of 10,000 ha of land by 2030. Like any other land use in Namibia urban forestry16 and its management can have immense potential in mitigating C emissions and performing other environmental services.

The transformation of MSW to compost and electricity is the most significant mitigation potential under the Waste sector. Though mitigation potential from waste sources is, by comparison limited, the potential to expand the actions is high.

Overall, the updated NDC had a significant increment (22%) in mitigation potential across all sectors from 2015 targets (Table 2.6). Efforts under the IPPU sector increased three times more than the first NDC targets. The energy sectors mitigation potential also grew in the period 2020  2030 due to more technology-based options being availed to reduce GHG emissions. AFOLU had the least increment (3%) because of the nature of options created which are non-technological and the mitigation potential of the sector is almost saturated. Beyond that limit, AFOLU may shift to being an emitter of GHGs.

15 Other wooded land, or OWL, is defined by FRA-2000 as land with a tree crown cover (or equivalent stocking level) of 5 10% of trees able to reach a height of 5 meters at maturity, a crown cover of more than 10% of trees not able to reach a height of 5 meters at maturity (such as dwarf or stunted trees), or shrub and bush cover of more than 10%. OWL excludes areas with the tree, shrub, or bush cover just specified but of less than 0.5 hectares and width of 20 meters, as well as land predominantly used for agricultural practices (FAO 2000, 2001). 16 The term "urban forestry" refers to the management of all trees within a densely populated area, including trees in parks, on streetways, and on private property.

TABLE 2.6. UPDATED MITIGATION CONTRIBUTIONS (MT CO2E) BY SECTOR.

Green hydrogen, which uses renewable energy to produce hydrogen from water, is taking off around the globe including Namibia. Green hydrogen will play a crucial role in reaching the emissions neutrality goal, and it would be economically convenient. Opportunities exist today to pilot both green hydrogen for low-emission transport solutions and fuel cells for remote power provision. Meanwhile, in Namibia smaller stationary fuel cell systems have also started to be piloted for residential and tourism consumers 17 The countrys transition to modern fuels in the industry could also be a major area of potential growth for green hydrogen. Namibia is in the process of building the means towards clean energy sources. Currently, a feasibility study to explore whether Namibia can become a leading global contributor to green hydrogen is underway 18.

The study will investigate the costs to produce, process and transport the hydrogen. Namibia expects that the decarbonization plan of the electric matrix by 2030 will bring a significant GHG emissions reduction through green hydrogen.

Climate change continues to be a real threat to Namibias development progress. The country already has a harsh desert and a low precipitation climate. Population growth, extreme inequalities, and development trends will further exacerbate and worsen current challenges and other existing vulnerabilities, with changing rainfall patterns and rising temperatures.

The country's climate vulnerability is closely related to its aridity and high-water scarcities. The Namibian land sector is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and is already hard hit. Besides the increasing variability of dry spells and flood events, woody encroachment is having a major impact on this key sector.

Among the drivers of woody encroachment is anthropogenic climate change itself. Woody encroachment has adverse impacts on savanna ecosystem services such as groundwater recharge and biodiversity. It further drastically decreases the suitability for eco-tourism and specifically the carrying capacity for both livestock and wildlife in large parts of Namibia, thus adversely affecting the land productivity and rural livelihoods. Bush thinning improves the livestock industry resilience to climate change. This industry accounts for 90% of all agricultural production in Namibia with approximately 60% of households owning cattle, including nearly 40% of poor households. From an adaptation perspective, bush thinning and the sustainable utilisation of bush biomass in line with the restoration of savanna rangelands thus yield significant benefits. Corresponding activities and value chains are supported by the National Rangeland Management Policy and Strategy and the ongoing Bush Control and Biomass Utilization projects/initiatives.

Most of the current climate change adaptation projects, and programs in Namibia tend to focus on capacity building, knowledge communication, field implementation, and policy formation and integration, with all nationally implemented projects supporting community-based adaptation. Regions within Namibia that are particularly targeted for adaptation interventions are the northern parts of the country, including Kavango, Zambezi, Oshikoto, Oshana, Ohangwena, Omusati, and the northern part of Kunene Region.

Most of the adaptation activities are implemented with funding donor and international multilateral institutions such as the Green Climate Fund, Adaptation Fund, Global Environmental Fund (GEF), European Union (EU), United States Agency for International Development (USAID), GIZ, Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), etc. However, local institutions such as the Environmental Investment Fund also provide support to climate change adaptation activities.

3.2 Impacts and priorit ies for adaptation.

For the development of the Fourth National Communication19, climate change impacts and vulnerability was assessed for the most vulnerable sectors, namely water resources, agriculture, forestry, coastal zones, tourism, human health and disaster risk management.

Namibia relies on dams, ephemeral rivers and aquifers for its water supply. These water resources are supplemented to a limited extent by unconventional sources such as reclaimed water and desalination. The absence of perennial rivers in Namibias interior means that the country is reliant on rainfall as its natural water source. The semi-arid climate over most of the country coupled with high evaporation rates makes the country one with a net water deficit (mean annual rainfall minus potential evaporation), ranging from -4000 mm in the southeast to -1600 mm in the northeast.

To ensure sustainable long-term access to water, and effectively manage and conserve the countrys water resources with the uncertainty of climate change, the following adaptation options are pertinent; promote efficient water harvesting techniques, recycling and re-use of water, promote the use of desalination technologies to increase water supply, promote and encourage integrated water resources management, etc.

Agriculture is a key sector of the Namibian economy. It is not only the largest employer and also critical to livelihoods and food security. Over two-thirds of households practice subsistence cropping and pastoralism, mostly on communally held lands. Agricultural production ranges from the intensive production of horticultural crops) to large-scale production of cereals, mainly maize and millet. Less than 10% of the land surface is used for crop production, while nearly 75% is used for livestock production.

Current/potential adaptation options and issues in the agriculture and forestry sectors include implementation of Climate-Smart Agriculture, bush-thinning and the sustainable utilisation of bush biomass, improved water management, improved monitoring and early warning, the development of knowledge and decision-support systems, and the development of new crop varieties and technologies to support farming. Barriers to adaptation include reduced extension service and slow uptake of Climate Smart Agriculture and Conservation Agriculture techniques.

Tide gauge records from Lderitz and other localities on the west coast of southern Africa over the last 30 years have revealed an estimated sea-level rise that is comparable with the global measurements.20 Given the lack of natural and human-made protective infrastructure to storm surges, the coastal areas are highly vulnerable to sea-level rise. The most significant drivers of climate change risks and vulnerability that are of importance to coastal environments and fisheries are modification of terrestrial climatic and hydrologic processes; change in coastal and oceanic circulation processes; ocean acidification; increased sea surface temperature; sea-level rise; increase in sea storminess and changing wind systems.

The adaptation measures proposed for coastal zones can be classified broadly into no regrets and additional options that are proactively designed to counter sea-level rise. No regrets options are efforts that are undertaken even if climate change were not happening. In the context of sea-level rise, no regrets options available to Namibia include enforcement of development restrictions within the coastal buffer zone; reduce the degradation of wetlands, estuaries, dune cordons and sandbars; integration of sea-level rise scenarios into future planning decisions; incorporate sea-level rise risks in disaster management strategies and alleviate poverty and improve living conditions.

On the other hand, other options are new interventions or investments, additional to the business as usual and existing efforts, designed to improve wellbeing, maintain the environment, and ultimately counter sea-level rise. These options can be classified into physical, biological, and institutional responses. Physical options are hard engineering techniques such as seawalls, groynes, detached breakwaters, and revetments. Biological options are more natural, less likely to produce adverse consequences and more cost-effective than most physical 20 (The Report on 1.5C Global Warming-Relevant Aspects for Climate Services, 2019) options. They include dune cordons, estuary and wetland rehabilitation, and kelp beds. Institutional options are policy or decision-making responses. Added options include vulnerability mapping and risk communication, design and implementation of appropriate and effective legislation, the establishment of early warning systems, research and monitoring and design of appropriate insurance products to address sea-level rise.

Based on the 2016/17 Namibia Intercensal Demographic Survey and the 2006/07 National Demographic and Health survey, the main causes of death in children under five years (diarrhoea (42%), undernutrition (40%), malaria (32%), acute respiratory infections (30%)) have a strong environmental component linked to climate. The main causes of adult mortality are AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria. Since these diseases often co-occur, it is difficult to establish the exact cause of death. Climate change is already exacerbating the causes of infant and adult mortality, and this will likely worsen in the future.

Adaptation needs and barriers in the Namibian health sector include cross-sectoral cooperation and collaboration, accessibility, and effectiveness of health care infrastructure, especially among the poor segments of the population, a lack of understanding of the linkages between climate and health in Namibia.

Namibias tourism industry has undergone rapid growth in the past three decades, with an average increase in international arrivals of 16% per year on average. This growth rate has made tourism the fastest-growing sector of the Namibian economy. Tourism in Namibia relies largely on the wildlife sector. Changes in the quality of wildlife viewing, wildlife numbers and vegetation because of climate change are expected to affect the demand for wildlife tourism, which is estimated to be as much as a 15 % reduction in tourism demand.

With climate change contributing to an increase in disaster risk, disaster risk management becomes a vital and urgent component of any climate change adaptation program. As part of climate change adaptation policies and investments, Namibia needs to focus on reducing its vulnerability and planning for measures to mitigate natural disaster risks.

Adaptation measures proposed in this updated NDC cover the following aspects; minimise the loss of human life, property and damage to the environment from hazards of natural and ecological origin, advocate an approach to disaster risk management that focuses on reducing risks especially to those sections of the population who are most vulnerable due to poverty and a general lack of resources (both urban and rural communities), advocate for a shared awareness and responsibility to reduce disaster risk in communities, and in society generally, and to facilitate partnerships in this regard between organs of state, the private sector, non- governmental organisations and communities.

The current updated NDC seeks to accelerate Namibias socio-economic growth by a holistic approach to addressing sector-specific vulnerabilities and directing funding to adaptation for effective climate action. This NDC will seek to foster new jobs and lead to resilient communities across the country. The Government listed seven sectors as being especially vulnerable: water resources; agriculture; forestry; coastal zones; tourism; health; and disaster risk management. The government has prioritized action on climate change and introduced a national climate change policy; however, the success in the implementation of these actions is closely related to donor engagement and financing.

Mitigation and adaptation often coexist together and quite a few adaptation actions do have mitigation co- benefits. The Namibian Government is currently formulating the National Adaptation Plan (NAP). The NAP will serve as the guiding document to implement adaptation actions in Namibia. Namibias first NDC in 2015 did not identify blue carbon ecosystem strategies or plans to leverage this potential. As Namibia works to enhance its climate commitments and revise its NDC, there is an opportunity to explore blue carbon potential. In this update, Namibia seeks to highlight the integration of blue carbon in its future NDC revision process. Namibia expects to include these ecosystems in NDCs to benefit from the additional services they provide, including coastal protection, wildlife habitat and water filtration.

Table 3.1 provides a summary description of prioritised adaptation actions, timelines for adoption, accountable lead ministries, and the link with Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). More details on adaptation measures are outlined in appendix 2. Furthermore, blue economy opportunities are highlighted in Table 3.2.

TABLE 3.1. ADAPTATION ACTIONS.

27. Promote community-based natural resource management data collection and archiving Conservancy programme and Community Forests.

In this update, crucial areas of climate change policy and implementation are adequately addressed, specifically 1) Gender; 2) Youth involvement; and 3) Private sector engagement.

It is also important to highlight an additional area related to Youth. During the NDC implementation and particularly for mitigation measures in the AFOLU, Namibia will seek to promote youth participation in climate change projects and awareness campaigns. Since young people and future generations will inherit the worst impacts of the climate crisis and bear the future costs of the decisions made today21, Namibia recognises that the youth are a driving force for higher climate ambition. The NDC implementation is set to provide employment opportunities and providing support for youth entrepreneurship.

Climate change impacts do not discriminate between men and women; however, the level of resilience differs within the gender stream. According to the Agricultural Survey by the Namibia Statistics Agency22, the greatest percentage of subsistence farming households in the country is headed by women. However, women are also said to have limited access to capital, productive land, knowledge and services and these factors, in turn, decrease the resilience and adaptive capacities of women. As part of this NDC update, Namibia acknowledges the importance of addressing gender issues, particularly womens participation in climate action. Most priority actions have a specific target for womens participation.

In the implementation phase of this NDC, detailed baseline gender/youth climate assessments and evaluations which include just transition strategies are to be conducted. These are to include priority sectors of AFOLU, agriculture, energy, waste and IPPU. Consequently, informed capacity building and planning for gender/youth- oriented climate actions and just transition training will be carried out in defined focal points.

Considerations are to be given to the following:

Establishment of a gender/youth climate and risk management working group.

Review of gender/review climate legal framework and policy.

Develop and incorporate into NDCs gender/youth climate strategy.

Development of a just transition strategy and a green job assessment model for Namibia.

To measure the impact of climate measures on key development indicators, such as GDP, jobs, skills, revenue distribution and inequalities and gender inequality, a national Green Jobs Assessment Model will be developed. The assessment's findings and process of multi-stakeholder dialogues will help Namibia foster evidence-based NDC policymaking and a just transition.

Namibia has an abundance of blue carbon waiting to be discovered and reported. Our challenge is to figure out how and where to act to strengthen blue carbon opportunities. With the tenth longest coastline (1572 km) in Africa 23, Namibias Blue Carbon ecosystems hold great potential as Nature-based Solutions to mitigate climate change. They also play a unique role in protecting coastlines from the increasing impacts of climate change by absorbing incoming wave energy, providing storm surge protection, and preventing erosion 24. Namibia has therefore, proposed future blue economy adaptation activities (Table 3.2).

TABLE 3.2. PROPOSED FUTURE ADAPTATION ACTIVITIES IN NAMIBIAS BLUE ECONOMY.

Improve climate-resilient engineering and building standards for infrastructure in housing, rail, transport, coastal, waste management, telecoms, refrigeration, and energy.

Planning  Protect the 1500 km coastline beaches against erosion, which will include the prioritization of EBSAs (islands, wetlands, and riverine basins).  Update the agro-ecological zones to include ocean industries and areas and strengthen coastal beach erosion management systems.

Establish a Coastal Vulnerability Index to sea-level rise.

Expand and modernize the coastal weather observation network with technological systems such as the oceanographic and meteorological buoys to ensure adequate climate information service for adaptation.

Improve research on understanding impacts and responses to sea-level rise at some of the vulnerable coastal areas, and through data exchange between Benguela countries and ocean-based economies.

Establish comprehensive early warning and disaster prevention systems specific to areas in the ocean and coastal environments.

4. Eco-Tourism and Wildlife  Support conservation and technological development to enable the tourism sector to deal properly with climate change.

Aquaculture  Implement effective environmental monitoring systems including environmental and sanitary surveillance and warning system along the coastline.  Establish partnerships to facilitate the generation of knowledge (basic and applied) through the alliance of research institutions, public regulators, and ocean and marine industries.

Identify and proclaim marine protected areas to conserve biologically sensitive sites.

6. Marine Mining  Ensure that exploration and mining within the Protected Areas comply with the environmental and economic regulatory frameworks.

Enact a legal framework benchmarked against environmental global best practices to facilitate sound marine exploration and environmentally sustainable mining activities.

Manufacturing  Reduce fish meal-based by-products emanating from fresh fish.

Promote innovations in food processing, food losses and waste.

8. Coastal Agriculture  Scale-up climate-smart technologies to increase the crop, livestock, and fisheries productivity.

Adapt conservation agriculture approach as the basis for sustainable coastal farming and improved food security.

Use irrigation water-saving technologies and organic soil nutrient sources.

Management  Promote integrated water resources development and management practices including artificial replenishment of groundwater tables.  Attract investments for desalinization of seawater for human use, blue forestry and urban greening, and food security interventions.

Advance wastewater reuse and recycling technologies at the municipal and industry level.

Namibia would need funding, capacity development and technology transfer to fully implement the mitigation and adaptation measures found in this NDC. This section presents an overview of the means of implementation across finance, capacity building, and technology.

Costing each action involved identifying the cost for sub-actions, including upfront capital costs (e.g., infrastructure), ongoing maintenance costs, capacity-building or training, and the human resources needed to implement the action. A further desk review included an assessment of similar actions previously completed within the country, at national and/or subnational levels.

It is important to note that costs for some actions may change over time; it may be necessary to reconsider cost estimates as new information comes to light. For example, costs may decrease over time due to falling technology costs or barriers being removed by relevant policies.

Figure 4.1 provides an estimated $3.61 billion in funding required for any identified mitigation options by 2030. These represent the requisite capital investment costs for equipment and infrastructural resources. Investment levels for each sector are roughly equal to the projected mitigation shares for each emitting sector. AFOLU accounts for 49% of the total funding requirements for the 2020-2030 timeline. Investments in energy facilities account for the bulk of the remaining requirement. The AFOLU (49%) and energy sector (38%) mitigation actions require the most funds and these are mostly conditional upon international support.

FIGURE 4.1. MITIGATION INVESTMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL MEASURES.

The following figure 4.2 summarises the financial needs by sector in the adaptation as reported by each Ministry. The total financing needed for adaptation actions is just over USD 1.72 billion. The largest funding is required for agriculture (26%, USD 564 million), forestry (21%, USD 454 million), and coastal zones (12%, USD 255 million). Most of the requested funding depends on international support.

FIGURE 4.2. SUMMARY NEEDS FOR ADAPTATION ACTIONS.

Financial needs remain high amid ongoing efforts. Most actions that need financing and mobilisation of future resources will be a fair blend of national and foreign funds. The estimated net cost for the established NDC mitigation measures is expected to be about 3.61 USD billion and more than USD 1.72 billion for adaptation goals, reflecting a combined requirement of about USD 5.33 billion in financing. Table 4.1 summarises the approximate worth of the finance needed over the next ten years. The unconditional measures make up 10 per cent of the overall projected support and for the conditional measures 90%.

TABLE 4.1. ESTIMATED MITIGATION AND ADAPTATION FINANCE NEEDED.

Extensive research and consultations with sectoral leads were conducted as part of the NDC revision phase to generate conditional and unconditional cost forecasts for mitigation and adaptation steps from 2020 through 2030. The overall expected cost of the NDC mitigation defined by Namibia by 2030 is estimated to be about USD 3.61 billion and USD 1.72 billion for adaptation goals, reflecting a total finance need of about USD 5.33 billion (approximately 77 billion Namibia dollars) (Table 4.1).

Finance is critical for the implementation of the mitigation and adaptation actions set out in Namibias updated NDC. International public financing sources will provide the large-scale investment needed. Strengthening finance from domestic and external sources will also be key in supporting the implementation of the mitigation and adaptation actions.

Similarly, this NDC update includes conditions for their full implementation, such as additional or enhanced international support in the form of finance, technology transfer, technical assistance and capacity-building. Improving access to public and private financing sources is, therefore, a high priority for Namibia. Meeting the additional investment and financial flows would require a combination of:

commitments by developed countries to provide additional financial assistance to developing countries under the Convention;

appropriate national policies to encourage private investment and domestic government investment in mitigation and adaptation measures;

optimal use of the funds available under the Convention and from other sources to spread the risk across public and private sources;

expansion of the carbon market through more stringent commitments by Annex I Parties to increase demand and possible additional mechanisms to increase supply; and  new sources of predictable funds to provide additional external financial flows to developing countries for adaptation and mitigation.

If the funding available under the financial mechanism of the UNFCCC remains at its current level and continues to rely mainly on voluntary contributions, it would not be sufficient to address the estimated future financial flows needed for mitigation and adaptation. However, with the right policies and/or incentives, a substantial part of the required additional investment and financial flows could be covered by currently available sources. National policies can assist in shifting investments and financial flows made by private and public investors into more climate-friendly alternatives and optimizing the use of available funds by spreading the risk across private and public investors. Improvement in, and an optimal combination of mechanisms, such as the carbon markets, financial mechanism of the Convention, ODA, national policies and, in some cases, new and additional resources will be needed to mobilize the necessary investment and financial flows to address climate change.

The implementation of mitigation actions faces multiple barriers in various areas such as institutional, organisational, financial and technology technological issues. There is an urgent need to improve the enabling environment for tracking climate change activities. Many barriers have been removed in recent years to speed up the implementation of mitigation projects. The existing challenges cannot be addressed alone, and coordinated and concerted efforts of all partners are needed. It is for this reason that Namibia has joined the NDC Partnership, and we believe that it will be a valuable partnership to assist the country to achieve NDC targets and contribute to the overall goals outlined in the Paris Agreement.

Investment in climate mitigation activities will be associated with high perceived and actual risks related to environmental, technological, financial, and regulatory uncertainties. Namibia will explore various de-risking instruments that include insurance, guarantees and derivative-based products, as tools that can directly improve the risk-return profile in favour of low carbon technologies.

It is also expected that the technical and financial support provided by the NDC Partnership will facilitate the closure of information gaps in areas that are critical to determining the status and effectiveness of the NDCs. Assessment and evaluation of essential baseline data and variables, such as GDP, industrial production, population, consumption, expenditure, land-use, soil quality, water quality, precipitation and evaporation are critical fields. In essence, the NDC partnership plan is to make provision for the collection of baseline data as well as the expansion of tracking and monitoring data related to the various aspects of the NDC implementation process.

Namibia has significant renewable energy potential and has taken steps to direct investment and creating an enabling environment for private sector investment in renewables. Namibias transport is dominated by the road component for both passengers and goods. Taking into consideration the extended geographic nature of the country with low population densities outside its urban areas, there is little prospect for the transport landscape to change in the short or medium term.

4.5.2 IPPU including RAC.

In the cement industry use of extenders and other materials to replace GHG-intensive clinker has been one way of reducing the GHG intensity of cementitious products. The challenge is that the long-term properties of these products are not known. This makes it difficult to find an appropriate properties metric to use as the denominator.

For the RAC sector the main barriers hindering the uptake of highly efficient, low-GWP RAC appliances include 1) The absence of market guidance and/or incentives for investment in energy-efficient and climate-friendly products, 2) Standardised technician training regarding maximisation of energy efficiency and safe-handling and installation of climate-friendly (natural) refrigerants which are flammable and/or toxic limited and requires strengthening and expansion, 3) Lack of a standardised MRV system, 4) Lack of public awareness of climate- friendly refrigerant alternatives, such as natural refrigerants, 5) Current lack of financial mechanisms to support the replacement of high-GWP and inefficient units.

Implementing mitigation actions in the AFOLU sector is challenging given a lack of data and complexities associated with multiple stakeholders at multiple scales. Land ownership coupled with high financial costs, a harsh arid climate, lack of technology and capacity are some of the challenges facing Namibia.

Limited waste is generated in Namibia (due to a small population). There are long distances between the municipalities making it expensive to transport waste. There is also inadequate waste characterisation. Viable waste to energy projects requires access to reliable and suitable feedstock which, given the current system, presents may present a potential barrier. Finally, administrative, and technical capacity requirements tend to be quite high.

Namibia is aware that the implementation of our NDC presents several challenges, particularly in terms of financial and technological resources. Substantial funding is required to enable Namibia to meet its pledges. Namibia, as a developing country, faces numerous difficult challenges to maintain the welfare of its population. As such, the country will not be able to allocate adequate funding to meet the climate change agenda, even if this is of prime importance to it. Efforts, including incentives to attract private investors, have been deployed to bring in the funds needed.

Namibias efforts will undoubtedly contribute to the global efforts to mitigate the adverse impacts of climate change. In this context, the country is strengthening the existing institutional arrangements, to ensure a robust and transparent climate action that would enable to build a vibrant national Measurement, Reporting and Verification system (MRV). The system is expected to harmonize and track all data needs of the relevant local and international stakeholders. It is to comprise of the following components: mitigation, adaptation, GHG inventory, support received, and support needed.

Namibia presented conceptual MRV systems in its BUR1 and BUR2, with the intent of implementing the same. To date, some progress has been recorded but this is still insufficient to meet the reporting requirements. Recognising this gap in the reporting framework, this is a very urgent item on the agenda of the country and is considered of utmost importance in the near future, in line with the revision of the NDC and its implementation post-2020. Based on the collection of data and other information for producing the last 3 GHG inventories and mitigation and needs chapters of the 3 BURs, it is evident that the present institutional arrangements for the MRV of Emissions (GHG inventory) are still weak and need strengthening while the MRV for Mitigation and Support are still in their infancies. Further work, brainstorming and consultation with stakeholders has led to the design of an improved MRV concept which will take on board objectively performing institutional arrangements to make the systems functional in the coming years, after appropriate capacity building. The proposed new concepts for the 3 MRV systems are presented in the BUR3, the intent being to meet the requirements of the Paris Agreement (PA).

Efforts have been deployed to develop the MRV systems and build capacity domestically to sustainably assess and report emissions, mitigation actions, including emissions reductions and support needed and received within the framework of the UNFCCC. Progress has been made but there remain challenges relating to:

Systematic availability of all data required for the UNFCCC reports;

Sufficiency of resources to implement the MRV components exhaustively;

Formalised roles and responsibilities of institutions and individuals for accountability.

A major gap identified is the inability of the system to effectively aggregate the cumulative effects of individual mitigations and adaptation actions as well as evaluating policy measures. The following capacity building needs were identified:

Training on the latest IPCC, UNFCCC guidelines, data processing.

Capacity-building on GHG data management and institutional arrangements.

Continuous training of GHG experts, especially new experts on GHGs at the international level; and  Assessment and monitoring of the effects of GHGs on the policy level for mitigation and adaptation actions.

5.2 Insti tut ional arrangements to track NDC implementation.

An effective MRV system is necessary to successfully implement Namibia's NDC, which enables the country to monitor the effectiveness of its mitigation and adaptation measures and facilitates access to climate finance. Following the national institutional framework for climate change management, the climate change unit in the Ministry of Environment, Forestry and Tourism is responsible for tracking progress. The Project Management Unit coordinates the day-to-day issues related to the development of reports. Sector leads have been identified for each of the IPCC sectors, see Figure 5.1. The working group members are currently responsible for collecting and providing activity data from their sectors. Namibia Statistics Agency (NSA) has played a key role in providing key national statistics, especially on imports and exports of commodities. Currently, data archiving is done by the MEFT, however, discussions have started to have this task under the NSA. Current existing institutional arrangements are depicted in Figure 5.1.

FIGURE 5.1. INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR NDC TRACKING.

Table 5.1 summarises Namibias framework for tracking and reporting on the progress of implementing the mitigation and adaptation goals outlined in this NDC. It summarises the institutions roles and responsibilities to guide and support the implementation of NDC MRV at the national level including policy and strategic decision levels.

TABLE 5.1. INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR NAMIBIAS NDC MRV MANAGEMENT: RESPONSIBILITIES AND ROLES IN CLIMATE CHANGE MANAGEMENT.

Responsible for coordinating, managing climate change issues in the country and implementation of the UNFCCC. The MEFT is also responsible for the coordination of the transposition and implementation of environmental laws in the field of environmental and climate change. The MEFT is the coordinator of the GHG emissions Inventory and is the lead for the estimates of the Waste Sector.

The ministry is in charge of monitoring and reporting in the key sectors relevant to climate change mitigation including energy management, energy efficiency and renewable energy.

GHG inventory lead for the Energy sector, including mitigation.

It oversees monitoring and reporting in key sectors of climate change mitigation (AFOLU) and adaptation in agriculture, forestry, and water management. GHG inventory lead for AFOLU Sector, including mitigation. Already involved in data collection and transmission activities.

It oversees monitoring and reporting on IPPU adaptation and mitigation. GHG inventory lead for IPPU Sector.

Already involved in data collection and transmission activities.

Office of the Prime Minister Member of NCCC and technical working groups.

NCCC.

Responsible for all national planning activities.

Namibia Statistics Agency (NSA) Has the national legal mandate to collect and archive all national data; hence they will be a crucial stakeholder for sex- disaggregated data collection in the project. Key data provider of the GHG emissions inventory, archiving and socio-economics scenarios. Already involved in data collection and transmission activities.

Namibia Agronomic Board (NAB) AD and info on agriculture, fertilizer and practices.

Already involved in data collection and transmission activities.

Civil aviation office Data provider of the GHG emissions inventory on LTOs and Already involved in data collection and transmission activities.

Namibia Roads Authority (NRA) Data provider of the GHG emissions inventory on vehicles and road transport.

Already involved in data collection and transmission activities.

Namibia Airports Authority (NAA) Data provider of the GHG emissions inventory on civil aviation.

Already involved in data collection and transmission activities.

Already involved in data collection and transmission activities.

Namibia Meteorological Services Data provider on adaptation. Promotes the application of agriculture, health, energy, tourism, environment and other sectors generations and posterity.

City Council of Windhoek Data provider of the GHG emissions inventory and mitigation on the waste sector.

Already involved in data collection and transmission activities.

TransNamib Data provider of the GHG emissions inventory on rail transport.

Not involved in data collection and transmission activities.

Nampower Data provider of the GHG emissions inventory on electricity generation.

Already involved in data collection and transmission activities. Namibian Dairies Data provider of the GHG emissions inventory on information on cattle feeds.

Already involved in data collection and transmission activities.

Ohorongo Information on carbon emissions related to Portland clinker production.

Already involved in data collection and transmission activities.

Data provider of the GHG emissions inventory on the IPPU sector.

Already involved in data collection and transmission activities.

Development Bank of Namibia Provides finance for larger enterprises in key economic sectors that actors.

University of Namibia Develop national emission factors.

Already involved in data collection and transmission activities.

Develop national emission factors.

Already involved in data collection and transmission activities.

Namibia Energy Institute Serves as a national information resource base for sustainable energy use and management.

Already involved in data collection and transmission activities.

Already involved in data collection and transmission activities.

Desert Research Foundation Studies and surveys for GHG inventory and EFs Namibia Medical Society Works towards cost-effective and efficient health service provision and capability.

Red Cross Society Support gender-responsive disaster management and humanitarian action related to climate change.

As an association comprising 8 Non-Government Organisations (NGOs) and the University of Namibia, NACSO provides services to rural communities seeking to manage and utilise their natural resources in a sustainable manner. Could provide support on the linkages between gender and climate change.

Namibian Development Trust Seeks to ensure improved livelihoods and empower rural and access to information.

NBC As the public broadcaster of Namibia, NBC is uniquely positioned mitigation, adaptation and reporting.

IOM IOM is the leading inter-governmental organization in the field of migration, and works on climate change-induced migration.

UNIDO Specialized agency of the United Nations promoting industrial environmental sustainability.

Friedrich-Ebert Stiftung Promotes democracy, development, social justice and peace international exchange.

Commissioned research on youth and climate change in Namibia.

MET. (2015). National Climate Change Strategy & Action Plan 2013  2020.

MET, N. (2013). National Policy on Climate Change for Namibia.

Ministry of Mines and Energy. (2017). National Renewable Energy Policy for Namibia (Issue July).

Namibia Statistics Agency. (2019). Namibia Census of Agriculture 2013 2104 - Communal Sector Report (Revised Report) (Issue November).

NPC. (2017). Namibias 5th National Development Plan (NDP 5).

Office of the President. (2004). Namibia Vision 2030.

Republic of Namibia. (2015a). Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC) of The Republic of Namibia to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (Issue September).

Republic of Namibia. (2015b). Republic of Namibia National GHG Inventory Report (Issue August).

Republic of Namibia. (2016a). Harambee Prosperity Plan: Namibian Governments Action Plan towards Prosperity for All. In Harambe Prosperity Plan.

Republic of Namibia. (2016b). Harambee Prosperity Plan 2016 - 2020.

Republic of Namibia. (2016c). National GHG Inventory Report NIR 2 (Issue September). Republic of Namibia. (2018). National GHG Inventory Report NIR 3 (Issue October). Republic of Namibia. (2019). National GHG Inventory Report NC4 (Issue September). Republic of Namibia. (2020). Namibias Fourth National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (Issue March 2020).

UNFCCC. (2018). 2018 Talanoa Dialogue Platform. United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.

Vaidyula, M., & Hood, C. (2018). Accounting for baseline targets in NDCs: Issues and options for guidance. Climate Change Expert Group Paper No.2018(2).

World Bank. (2020). Green Hydrogen in Deeveloping Countries. In Energy Sector Management Assistance Program.

WWF. (2020). Enhancing NDCs through nature-based solutions: 8 simple recommedations for integrating nature into NDCs. Authors: Martin, S., Bartlett, R., Kim, M. (S. Martin, R. Bartlett, & M. Kim (Eds.); Issue March).

Promote passenger vehicle fuel efficiency standards in 80 % of total passenger vehicle Switch to R290 (propane) and R744 (CO2) and safe disposal of old equipment Switch to R290 (propane) and R744 (CO2) and safe disposal of old equipment Methane net zero emissions by 2050 (achieve 75% of the target by 2030) TOTAL MITIGATION FUNDING REQUIREMENT: USD 3, 610, 000, 000 (approximately 3.61 billion US Water and Land Reform.

2 Establish best practice systems for improving the efficiency of water use Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Land Reform.

3 Coordinate use of surface and groundwater resources and artificially increase the recharge rate of groundwater aquifers to reduce evaporation Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Land Reform.

4 Improve water demand management, particularly at the local level and in the Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Land Reform.

Improvement in synergy and engagement between/among water users  Improved water Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Land Reform.

Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Land Reform.

7 Promoting diversification of crops to hedge against erratic rainfall and shorter seasons Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Land Reform.

Increased resilience to climate change and natural disasters  Promotion of climate-friendly agriculture business value chain USD 19,500,000 Conditional  Inclusion of gender considerations in climate agriculture initiatives  Engagements and investments in climate-smart agriculture targeting youths both in urban and rural areas.

8 Development of improved crop varieties that adapt to climate change (Climate Resilient Agriculture) Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Land Reform.

Improved plant genetics  Increased resilience to climate change and natural disasters  Improved food production 9 Enhancing access to farming inputs (i.e. seed and fertilizer) availability and maintain consistency in yields (Climate Resilient Agriculture) Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Land Reform.

Increased productivity facilitates reduced deforestation and helps the integrity of forests which are important carbon sinks  increase the carbon sequestration potential of agricultural soils by contributing to their building up of soil organic matter (SOM).

Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Land Reform.

Increased productivity facilitates reduced deforestation and helps the integrity of forests which are important 11 Promote the use of water targeting only irrigation of high-value crops (Climate Resilient Agriculture) Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Land Reform.

Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Land Reform.

Reduced land degradation  Improved pasture and agroforestry practices 13 Enhance integrated pest management as an ecosystem approach to crop production and protection (Climate Resilient Agriculture) are vital services to increase resilience.

14 Improvement of support services and capacity building to crop production resilient to climate change by promoting research, trials and up-scaling climate-smart farming systems that increase resilience to climate change.

Improved knowledge, capacity and buy-in by other agricultural sector players  Job creation and  Improved food security and water management;  Conservation of biodiversity Conditional  Facilitate affected womens participation in decision making, thereby assuring that their points of view on forest use are taken into account.  Promote and increase womens equal participation via gender goals or affirmative action.

Engagements and active participation of youth in sustainable forestry initiatives, adaptation, and policy reforms.

16 Bush biomass utilization and value addition (Bush based animal feed production, biochar application, drought resilience, improved food security, bush- to-energy, employment & income creation) USD116,000,000 Conditional  Include gender indicators in forestry management monitoring and evaluation.

17 Support agroforestry interventions to ensure food security (biomass of fodder, meat and Non-Timber Forest Produces (NTPs)) in Namibias most vulnerable communities.

18 Introduce legislation to reduce property and infrastructure development in environmentally sensitive areas and areas at risk of sea-level rise USD 14,962,500 Conditional 1. Enhancement of understanding of gender differences and addressing inequities. These are critical for improving impacts, maintaining well-being, sustaining economic growth, or taking advantage of new opportunities.

2. Comprehensive regulatory framework for environmental protection and the exploitation of natural marine and coastal resources.  The National change planning and support of resilience to anticipated climate change by enhancing understanding of planners of the nature  Monitoring gender balance in fisheries and aquaculture production  Timely decision- making processes for mitigation and adaptation to climate change. These are crucial to avoid the costs of inaction and to ensure environmental, social and economic sustainability of seafood production.

Policy on Coastal Management for Namibia, states that one of the policy 21 Collaborate with the insurance market to guide investment in coastal areas  Adequate risk assessment and eventuality planning and adaptation  Better understanding of climate change property risks and appropriate cover  Preparation of diverse sectors and communities for climate-related events  Protection of human lives, biodiversity, infrastructure and property, land, jobs and supports long term sustainability  Facilitate public and private sectors in planning, protecting economies and saving money in the long run.

Restoration of ecosystems and conservation of biodiversity  Water pollution remediation and reduction  Protection of infrastructure and property  Reduced replacement, maintenance and 25 Promote sustainable tourism and provide capacity building for climate change innovation in Namibias tourism sector.

USD 57,435,000 Conditional Engage and ensure active participation of women in  discussing policy development, decision-making, and strategies for climate change adaptation and mitigation at all levels of action.  addressing tourism climate change- related issues such as womens employment in tourism, working conditions, womens participation in planning and management, gender roles, womens rights.

26 Implement conservancies, tourism, and adaptation programs based on community- 27 Promote community- based natural resource management data collection USD 3,580,500 Unconditional for and of tourism. Tourisms positive role in helping to secure the future of many World Heritage sites in a changing climate is to be taken into account. 28 Diversify livelihoods in communities dependent on CBNRM initiatives such as Namibian Conservancy Programme and Community Forests.

29 Strengthen the capacity of health professionals in epidemic preparedness and response external emergencies, including epidemics;  Adaptation to the specific challenges of an epidemic, whatever the nature of the disease and different capacities, power, social resilience, vulnerabilities and resources in climate change adaptation strategies. It is  Awareness raising and conscientisation of the youth of various health- related issues that may arise as a result of climate change. This includes consideration of psychological vulnerabilities such as mental illness, the resources needed, and even in the event of a concurrent emergency important to note that gender roles and relations can either enable or constrain adaptive capacities.

30 Recruit and train community health workers to provide emergency first aid 31 Improve staff training on prevention and treatment of malnutrition local community on health and other impacts of global warming and measures to address climate change  Increase in literacy encourages change in attitudes and behaviour. It also enables the local community to adapt including collection, analysis and reporting of gender data, to better understand the health implications of climate change and climate policies.

34 Strengthen the policies required to effectively address both slow-onset and catastrophic events 37 Strengthen and provide capacity building for water and sanitation systems 38 Strengthen capacities for disaster risk preparedness, contingency planning and risk reduction all vulnerability and risk assessments. Social roles and a gender-specific division of labour lead to different and specific degrees Through innovative youth-centred approach engagement of youth on the forms of emergency and disaster situations that can occur because of climate change a various preparedness and response actions.

Identification of other vulnerable groups that would otherwise be missed and incorporated into the planning and mitigation/adaptation process Increased awareness and effective regulation and dedicated investments in disaster 41 Support community- based adaptation practices in both rural and urban  Establishment of alternative means of income i.e. diverse livelihoods, networks, social protection, etc.  Development of USD 1,680,000 Unconditional and recovery. Efficient programming requires a balance between the liabilities and capabilities of both women and men. Ensure participation of women on an equal footing in the green economy, notably in regard to their access to clean energy and technology as users and providers of services as well as in subnational, national and multilateral processes related to climate change and disasters/emergency situations.

Improvement in monitoring and evaluation  Improved disaster management and response efforts 1. Poverty alleviation and enhanced resilience to climate change impacts. 2.

Insurance promotes opportunities by helping to lessen financial repercussions of volatility and, in the longer term, create a space of certainty within which investments, planning and development activities can be undertaken. 3. Safety net and buffer for people shortly after a catastrophic event 4. Insurance can spur transformation by incentivizing risk reduction behaviour and fostering a culture of prevention- focused risk management.

