I. Introduction / Structure The Republic of Nauru welcomes this opportunity to submit its updated nationally determined contribution pursuant to Article 4.2 of the Paris Agreement under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). This updated nationally determined contribution (NDC) is intended to cover the time period of 1 January 2021 through 31 December 2030, and replaces the initial NDC submitted by Nauru to the UNFCCC on 17 November 2015.

The overriding priority of the Government of Nauru is to eradicate poverty and to improve the safety, security, and quality of life of its citizens. To this end, Naurus climate action has been aligned with national efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and is fully integrated with our National Sustainable Development Strategy (NSDS). Therefore, this updated NDC has been similarly structured around the following seven national sustainable development priorities:

Productive Land  Healthy and Productive People  Water Security  Food Security  Energy Security  Healthy Environment  Good Governance In addition, an eighth area of contributions  Loss & Damage  has been included to address climate change impacts that exceed Naurus adaptive capacity.

Nauru intends to pursue a range of sustainable development actions within these policy areas, which are described in this updated NDC, all of which bring significant climate change adaptation and mitigation co-benefits.

There is enormous opportunity for transformational change in Nauru. The centerpiece of our ambitious sustainable development strategy is the Higher Ground Initiative, which will dramatically increase the resilience of the country by migrating vulnerable homes and critical infrastructure to higher elevation, significantly expanding local food production, restoring degraded natural habitats, and pioneering a new Pacific Island urbanism. Combined with construction of the new port facility, jointly funded by the Green Climate Fund and the Asian Development Bank, Nauru can become a new hub of climate-resilient and sustainable economic opportunity for the Pacific region.

The Government of Nauru is committed to building genuine and durable partnerships, which will be needed to fully implement this updated NDC, particularly with regard to affordable finance and capacity building. To the extent possible, the resources required are described in this updated NDC.

Nauru will continue to show leadership in the effort to address climate change. As Chair of the Alliance of Small Island States from 2012 through 2014, Nauru fought for a strong Paris Agreement and was one of the first countries in the world to submit its instrument of ratification to the Secretary-General.

Nauru also co-chairs, along with the Government of Germany, the Friends of Climate and Security at the United Nations. With this updated NDC, Nauru demonstrates that its commitment to climate action extends to its ambitious national implementation efforts.

II. Summary of Naurus Nationally Determined Contribution II. Summary of Naurus Nationally Determined Contribution Contribution Conditions SDGs Advanced Climate Change Co-Benefits Productive Land & Coast HIGHER GROUND INITIATIVE Unconditional Adaptation  Increased resilience to sea level rise  Increased resilience to extreme rainfall events  Increased resilience to drought  Increased resilience to disruption of food supply Mitigation  Increased land availability for expanded deployment of solar energy  Increased land availability for high efficiency residential development  Reduced dependency on automobile transport Adaptation  Increased resilience of housing and critical infrastructure to climate change impacts  Increased resilience of coastal zone ecosystems and biodiversity Unconditional Adaptation  Increased reliability of imports, including essential food and medical Unconditional Adaptation  Increased domestic capacity to implement effective adaptation actions Unconditional Adaptation  Increased preparedness for tropical diseases, heat stress, dehydration, and other climate change-driven public health impacts  Increased resilience of public health care infrastructure waste at a secure site off island.

Unconditional Adaptation  Improved water supply, storage and distribution would provide water Mitigation  Potential use of groundwater supplies would reduce energy use for water Food Security Prepare and approve the Strategic Plan for the Sustainable Development of Agriculture Unconditional Adaptation  Improve resilience by collecting data to better understanding climate impacts on agriculture, fisheries and marine resources Maintain ongoing agricultural technical trials Unconditional Draft Coastal Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill Unconditional  Improve resilience by increasing domestic food production Mitigation  Reduced emissions related to the import of foods from great distances Adaptation  Infrastructure with increased resilience to climate change impacts and water supplies and minimize run off.

Unconditional Adaptation  Increased resilience of sensitive ecosystems to climate change impacts Unconditional Adaptation  Improved coordination of Government Ministries in adaptation actions  Increased effectiveness of implementation efforts Mitigation  Improved coordination of Government Ministries in mitigation actions  Increased effectiveness of implementation efforts Loss & Damage  Increased capacity to cope with climate change impacts that cannot be III. National Context The Republic of Nauru is one of the smallest and most geographically isolated countries in the world.

Image courtesy of the U.S. Department of Energy Atmospheric Radiation Measurement (ARM) user facility Our single, coral-capped island (21 square kilometers) is home to approximately 13,000 residents, over 90% of whom are indigenous Nauruan. The island itself is located in the central Pacific Ocean approximately 40 kilometers south of the Equator, and can be roughly divided into two distinct topographical areas  the low-lying coastal area known as Bottomside, and the much higher elevation interior area (up to 65 meters above sea level) known as Topside. The vast majority of homes and critical infrastructure is located Bottomside. Nauru is currently considered an upper-middle income country, with a gross national income per capita of USD 12,060 in 2018 according to World Bank. Phosphate mining, and more recently Australias Regional Processing Center, were reliable sources of revenue for a time, but both are in significant decline and are projected to decline further over the coming years. As a micro-state with small landmass and population, few marketable resources, and isolation from major international markets, traditional development indicators fail to provide an accurate picture of the circumstances on the ground and the fact that many traditional development pathways are foreclosed to us. While income has risen in recent years, Nauru remains one of the most economically vulnerable countries in the world and sustainable development is a persistent challenge. Despite our challenges, Nauru is working to leverage its strategic advantages to create new economic opportunities. Naurus national carrier, Nauru Airlines, already provides important connectivity within the Pacific. Funded by the Green Climate Fund (GCF) and the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the new port facility currently under construction will further establish Nauru as an important regional transportation hub in the central Pacific, and will open opportunities for local businesses to deliver value- added services for the shipping and fishing industries. This will augment the modest but reliable stream of revenue derived from the international sale of fishing licenses under the Parties to the Nauru Agreement, which governs one of the most sustainably managed tuna fisheries in the world. Securing these emerging economic opportunities will depend in large part on Naurus ability to respond to climate change. Like most Small Island Developing States (SIDS), Nauru is highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change, which has the potential to negatively impact coastal infrastructure, food security, water security, public health and safety, and local terrestrial and marine ecosystems. In addition, an ambitious transition to renewable energy has the potential to significantly enhance the reliability and resilience of the energy system, as well as improve the countrys balance of trade, which is currently distorted by a high reliance on imported fossil fuels. Therefore, the Government of Nauru has integrated climate action throughout its NSDS. The NSDS, along with the Republic of Nauru Framework for Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Reduction (RONAdapt), have been the guiding policy documents for three successive administrations. Despite the strong commitment of the Government to climate action, Nauru has struggled to secure the financial and capacity resources required for full and effective implementation in an environment of declining foreign assistance. The barriers to access of support for SIDS are well-established, and include:

Limited institutional capacity,  Burdensome application and reporting requirements,  Small projects that are not eligible for many international and bilateral funds,  Low credit worthiness due to existing levels of public debt and unreliable revenue streams to service new debt, and  Higher per capita cost of projects, which penalizes SIDS with regard to some social impact metrics. In addition, some multi-lateral development banks evaluate the creditworthiness and income classification of SIDS based on metrics that do not adequately reflect the real economic situation in the country, which presents an additional hurdle to accessing climate and sustainable development finance. Like many SIDS, Nauru currently has a very narrow economic base with its national revenue dependent on only a few key sectors that are vulnerable to external economic shocks. Removing these barriers to affordable finance, would significantly accelerate the implementation of the the NSDS and RONAdapt along with this updated NDC. Bringing about transformational change to Nauru through the implementation of these priority country- driven strategies and initiatives, including this updated NDC, is a top priority of the Government. This will require scaled up financial resources from the international community, including grant-based resources, along with technical and capacity building support.

IV. Fairness, Ambition and Progress The Republic of Nauru communicates its updated NDC and the accompanying information to facilitate clarity, transparent and understanding. This updated NDC is fair, ambitious, and represents a progression beyond the initial NDC submitted by the Republic of Nauru to the UNFCCC on 17 November 2015.

Nauru is one of the worlds smallest republics and one of the least responsible for the impacts of climate change, with levels of CO2 equivalent emissions estimated at 0.000061 gigatons in 2014, or 0.00019% of global emissions. Coupled with its limited natural resources and economic prospects, Naurus updated NDC represents a level of climate ambition that far outweighs its size and demonstrates its climate leadership.

The SAMOA Pathway reaffirmed that SIDS remain a special case for sustainable development in view of their unique and particular vulnerabilities and that they remain constrained in meeting their goals in all three dimensions of sustainable development. It further recognized that sea-level rise and other adverse impacts of climate change continue to pose a significant risk to small island developing States and their efforts to achieve sustainable development and, for many, represent the gravest of threats to their survival and viability, including, for some, through the loss of territory. For these reasons, Nauru is working to integrate climate action into its efforts across all policy areas and economic sectors to achieve its sustainable development priorities. This updated NDC is a significant enhancement from our initial NDC from 2015 as it elaborates in detail specific policies and actions across a wide array of priority sustainable development sectors that were not previously included, which Nauru aims to undertake with appropriate international assistance and support. Whereas our initial NDC stated our general desire to increase our countrys resilience to climate impacts through increased adaptation efforts and an overall desire to lower the carbon footprint of the energy sector, this updated NDC enumerates specific targets and actions for which Nauru hopes to implement to achieve our climate and sustainable development objectives and that will deliver significant climate change benefits. This NDC increases transparency by specifying specific polices and measures across Naurus main priority sustainable development sectors, which were prepared through extensive and inclusive consultation processes with stakeholders and ministries across the Government.

V. Gender Achieving gender equality and empowering all women and girls is a key outcome of the NSDS, as doing so improves the overall quality of life for all Nauruans. Nauru thus remains committed to advancing gender equality and social inclusiveness through efforts to implement the Paris Agreement, the SAMOA Pathway and the 2030 Agenda. Nauru hereby reaffirms its commitment to the implementation of SDG 5 and to raising capacity for effective climate change action in accordance with SDG 13 and target 13(b).

VI. 2050 Aspirational Goal Nauru aspires to achieve a balance between anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks by 2050, on the basis of equity and in the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty. This updated NDC sets the beginning of the path for Nauru to progress towards our aspiration of achieving net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. But achieving this aspirational goal will be contingent on the effective mobilization of sufficient international financial, technical and capacity building support. This ambitious mitigation effort must be pursued in tandem with urgent adaptation actions, including the full realization of the Higher Ground Initiative, along with major improvements to national food security, water security, and public health and safety.

VII. Detailed Contributions This section provides further details of the contributions enumerated in the summary table in Section II above. These detailed contributions are organized by the following eight thematic areas:

1. Productive Land & Coast 2. Healthy and Productive People 3. Water Security 4. Food Security 5. Energy Security 6. Healthy Environment 7. Good Governance 8. Loss & Damage For each of these thematic areas, specific contributions are identified and details are provided. Additionally, each focus area identifies the SDGs advanced by the contributions.

Higher Ground Initiative One of the dubious legacies of colonialism in Nauru is the phosphate mining industry. For much of the twentieth century, Naurus mineral wealth was exported abroad by foreign mining interests, with very little of the economic benefits accruing to Nauruans. Only with its national independence in 1968 was Nauru finally able to purchase control of mining operations. However by then annual production had already begun a steady decline. While mining operations under the state-owned enterprise RONPHOS did provide a high standard of living for Nauruans up until the late 1990s, it left most of the interior of the island ragged with large limestone pinnacles, which has made further development of the land impossible without their removal.

As a consequence, the vast majority of homes and critical infrastructure in Nauru, including the airport, hospital, and major arterial road, are located only a few meters above sea level on the coast. The mined- out interior, known as Topside due to its significantly higher elevation, was largely written off by successive governments, but the impacts of climate change, including sea-level rise, have made the restoration and development of Topside under the Higher Ground Initiative an urgent political priority for the Government.

The future of Nauru depends on moving to Higher Ground Relocating homes and critical infrastructure away from low-lying coastal areas will be an enormous undertaking for our small country. However, the Higher Ground Initiative aspires to achieve far more than simply retreat from the Pacific Ocean. It will pioneer a new model of Pacific urban development that is sensitive to the specific vulnerabilities and constraints of a small island nation, and also celebrate our unique cultural traditions and contributions. It offers a unique and transformational opportunity to build a more sustainable and prosperous future for the citizens of Nauru.

The incorporation of sustainable urban planning strategies and concepts into Higher Ground will deliver significant climate change adaptation and mitigation co-benefits and create an enabling environment conducive to sustained and sustainable economic development. This new Pacific Smart Village will harness prevailing winds to passively cool homes and buildings. High efficiency appliances will significantly reduce energy demand. Ubiquitous rainwater harvesting will support urban agriculture and recharge groundwater aquifers. Mixed-use development, with connectivity to employment centers around the island, has the potential to reduce the need for personal car use and facilitate the adoption of alternative mobility options. In addition to these obvious quality of life improvements, the pressures of human settlement on local ecosystems would be significantly reduced. The Smart Village and the new port facility together would become a new hub of regional economic activity, including value-added services for shipping and fishing vessels, as well as a nascent eco-tourism industry in Nauru. Most exciting, the Village will incorporate traditional architectural designs and building materials, so that both the built and natural environment strengthens our Central Pacific cultural heritage. Nauru includes the following actions to implement the Higher Ground Initiative as part of its NDC. Unconditional Contribution Develop Master Land Use Plan for relocation of homes and critical infrastructure to Topside as part of Higher Ground Initiative The next step for the Higher Ground Initiative will be the development of a Master Plan for Topside through a national consultative process with communities and landowners. Building a shared national vision will ensure that Naurus development meets the needs of current and future generations of Nauruans.

The Government of Nauru intends to engage development partners and leading sustainability experts to support this process as appropriate so that Nauru can draw on international best practices suitable for Naurus tropical climate and small island circumstances. The target for approval of the Master Plan is the end of 2021. Conditional Contribution Construction of pilot Smart Village residential units on Topside  Increased land availability for expanded deployment of solar energy  Increased land availability for high efficiency residential development  Reduced dependency on automobile transport Poverty will be reduced by the greater availability of safe, sustainable housing, as well as the creation of new jobs and economic opportunities for local businesses.

Food security will be increased by supporting urban agriculture and making land available for larger scale domestic food production.

Water security will be increased by the incorporation of water harvesting into new residential, commercial, and government development, as well as a modern water delivery and sewerage system.

Affordable and clean energy will be increased by the increased adoption of energy efficient appliances and other practices to reduce energy consumption and demand.

Decent work and economic growth will be increased by new opportunities in eco-tourism, hospitality, agriculture and aquaculture, and servicing of fishing and shipping vessels.

Resilience of critical infrastructure will be increased by relocation away from low-lying coastal areas vulnerable to inundation to significantly higher elevation.

Sustainability of communities will be enhanced by implementing sustainable building and planning practices, including energy efficiency, water harvesting, and transportation alternatives.

Climate action will be enhanced by dramatically increasing resilience to negative climate change impacts, including sea level rise, extreme weather events, and variation in precipitation.

Terrestrial ecosystems and biodiversity will be enhanced by reducing development pressure in ecologically sensitive areas of the island.

Durable partnerships and access to adequate means of implementation will be required to fully achieve these goals.

Reducing Coastal Erosion Almost all homes and critical infrastructure in Nauru, including schools, the hospital, and the airport, are located along the low-lying coastal perimeter of the island, typically only a few meters above sea level, leaving them highly vulnerable to coastal flooding and storm surge. Coastal erosion, which is clearly visible in many locations around the island and appears to be accelerating, exacerbates this risk. Sea level rise in the Pacific has been occurring at three times the global average and is likely a contributing factor to observed coastal erosion. Immediate investment in both hard and nature-based protections against coastal erosion are necessary to protect existing assets and to allow for an orderly migration to Topside on a realistic time scale as part of the Higher Ground Initiative. Nauru includes the following action to address coastal erosion as part of its NDC. Conditional Contribution Conduct technical assessment of coastal erosion and develop plan for implementing hard and nature-based solutions A technical assessment will inform the deployment of hard and nature-based solutions for reducing coastal erosion in Nauru. Financial support is required to fund the assessment, which will cost approximately USD 800,000. The target for completing the assessment is 2021.

Adaptation Co-Benefits  Increased resilience of housing and critical infrastructure to climate change impacts  Increased resilience of coastal zone ecosystems and biodiversity SDGs Advanced by Naurus NDC to Reducing Coastal Erosion Water security will be increased by reducing salt water intrusion into freshwater lenses.

The resilience of coastal infrastructure will be improved by reducing the risk of storm surge and coastal flooding.

Climate action will be enhanced by significantly mitigating the near- and medium-term impact of sea level rise.

The protection of marine ecosystems as a nature-based solution will augment efforts to reduce coastal erosion.

The protection of terrestrial ecosystems as a nature-based solution will augment efforts to reduce coastal erosion.

Durable partnerships and access to adequate means of implementation will be required to fully achieve these goals.

Construction of the new port facility commenced on Jan 2018. Completion was expected by Feb 2020, however, the COVID-19 pandemic is expected to cause significant delays, with completion now expected by early 2023. Adaptation Co-Benefits Mitigation Co-Benefits  Increased reliability of imports, including essential food and medical supplies  Increased capacity to receive heavy equipment necessary for large infrastructure improvements Mitigation  Reduced emissions associated with off-shore mooring and loading/unloading of shipping vessels Food security will be increased by significantly reducing interruptions to critical food imports, as well as by reducing the cost of healthy foods.

Decent work and economic growth will be increased by new opportunities providing value-added services to shipping and other maritime industries.

Resilience of critical infrastructure will be increased by upgrading the main port of entry and exit for goods so that it can continue operating in adverse climate conditions.

Climate action will be enhanced by reducing greenhouse gas emissions by enabling the efficient loading and unloading of shipping vessels, which is a large improvement over the current offshore method.

Partnership with the Green Climate Fund and the Asian Development is essential for the implementation of the new port facility.

As part of the Governments effort to prepare students with the knowledge and skills necessary to prosper as a small islanders in the global economy, Nauru is working with Germanys GIZ to integrate climate change into the school curriculum so that our youth understand the challenges facing their country and are prepared to implement effective climate actions. The climate change curriculum will be integrated into the revised national curriculum over the course of the next two years.

Adaptation Co-Benefits Mitigation Co-Benefits  Increased domestic capacity to implement effective adaptation actions  Increased domestic capacity to implement effective GHG emissions mitigation actions Education is improved through the development of a curriculum that incorporates climate change in a way that is nationally relevant and prepares youth and adults to better understand and assess climate change risks and effectively implement climate action.

Climate action is enhanced by building national capacity to effectively implement actions in all relevant policy areas and economic sectors to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and build resilience to the negative impacts of climate change, including sea level rise, extreme weather events, changes in precipitation patterns and disruption to food production and delivery systems.

Naurus partnership with GIZ and The Pacific Community will enable the development of a science-informed educational curriculum that incorporates nationally relevant information about climate change, including the risks posed to Nauru, as well as strategies to address them.

Improving Public Health System Improving Nauru's public health system is an urgent climate change adaptation priority. The COVID-19 pandemic has exposed the inadequacies of public health systems around the world. Shortages of medical equipment, hospital beds, and trained medical professionals, often stemming chronic under-investment in the health care sector, have proven deadly during the crisis. Pre-existing risk factors, such as high rates of non-communicable diseases, likely increased the morbidity of COVID-19, while disruption in global food supply chains due to a demobilized workforce limited the access of some communities to healthy foods. While clearly different from a viral pandemic in important respects, climate change will have similarly far reaching public health consequences for the most vulnerable countries. Climate change will undermine the maintenance of good public health in Nauru through a number of channels, including:

Changes in the incidence of vector-borne and other infectious diseases,  Increases in heat stress and dehydration, particularly in the elderly and other vulnerable individuals with underlying health risks,  Negative impacts on water quality and access, including through increased frequency and severity of floods and droughts,  Decreased access to healthy foods, particularly through global price shocks and interruptions of imports, and  Damage to critical health infrastructure, which is overwhelmingly located in low-lying coastal areas, extreme weather events and sea-level rise.

Nauru includes the following action as part of its NDC. Conditional Contribution Conduct assessment of national public health implications of climate change, including on resilience of public health infrastructure Improving the Governments understanding of the public health implications of climate change in Nauru and assessing the resilience of the hospital and other public health infrastructure to climate change impacts are essential first steps towards developing an adequate response. In partnership with the World Health Organization, the national assessment and its recommendations will inform the development of a national strategy to prepare the nation for the public health implications of climate change.

Adaptation Co-Benefits  Increased preparedness for tropical diseases, heat stress, dehydration, and other climate change-driven public health impacts  Increased resilience of public health care infrastructure SDGs Advanced by Naurus NDC on Improving Public Health Good health and well-being is enhanced by improving Naurus preparedness to handle the public health consequences of climate change, including increased incidence of tropical disease, heat stress and barriers to maintaining a proper diet and good hydration.

Climate action is enhanced by improving the resilience of Naurus public health infrastructure, as well as its preparedness to handle the negative impacts of climate change on public health.

Nauru is partnering with the World Health Organization under its Special Initiative: Climate Change and Health in Small Island Developing States. Nauru will also seek financial support from the GCF to fully fund the assessment and implementation of its recommendations.

Disposal of Asbestos In 2014, the Government of Nauru launched an effort to remove asbestos from all buildings. At the time, estimates put the total area of building surfaces covered by asbestos at around 212,000 square meters. Most of the asbestos was in the form of asbestos-cement in roofing and building cladding, including the hospital, schools, and government buildings. All asbestos was old and in various stages of deterioration, with swab and ground testing revealing contamination at multiple testing sites. Since then the asbestos waste has been insecurely stored at various locations around the island, including on the ground surrounding buildings and residences from which it was removed.

Asbestos, a known carcinogen, presents an ongoing health risk for all Nauruans. Nauru does not have the facilities for proper disposal and long-term storage, and therefore, it must be collected and transported to a suitable site off-island. The negative impacts of climate change, in particular more severe precipitation events and flooding, increases the risk of human exposure to asbestos through the air and groundwater. Therefore, asbestos removal and disposal is an urgent adaptation measure to climate change. Nauru includes the following action as part of its NDC. Conditional Contribution Collect, transport, and dispose of all asbestos waste at a secure site off-island Good health and well-being is enhanced by eliminating the risk of exposure to asbestos, a known carcinogen, currently posed by the insecure storage of asbestos waste around the island.

Clean water is protected by eliminating the risk of further contamination of ground water resources currently posed by insecure storage of asbestos.

Climate action is enhanced by reducing the risks associated with extreme rainfall, flooding and coastal inundation, which can increase the risk of asbestos exposure from insecure storage.

Access to adequate means of implementation is essential to finance the collection, transport and secure disposal of insecurely stored asbestos waste.

Provide a Reliable Supply of Clean Water Securing a safe and reliable water supply for all citizens remains an ongoing priority. Nauru is a permeable island with extremely limited surface runoff and no rivers or reservoirs. Naurus water supply is susceptible to climate events such as prolonged droughts which severely undermine the ability to supply water for domestic needs and to which focussed climate change adaptation efforts are required. Rainwater Rainwater capture is an important source of water in Nauru, which is captured from the rooftops of households and businesses and is stored in on-site storage tanks. However, changing rain patterns and extended droughts due to climate change leave Nauru vulnerable to water supply challenges. There are also concerns that household rainwater collection infrastructure such as roofs, gutters, pipes and storage tanks are unfit for water collection and storage. Groundwater Groundwater is available in some locations, but these supplies are expected to be contaminated and not suitable for drinking. The main use of groundwater is for showering, washing (kitchen & laundry), toilet flushing and for lawn and garden irrigation. There is a risk of saltwater intrusion into groundwater supplies, and a concept note to model these impacts has been prepared. Water Production, Storage & Delivery Naurus state-owned utility NUC has installed and operates five reverse-osmosis units to desalinate seawater for potable use around the island. Though NUC has increased water supply capacity, the water supply system is at risk from supply interruptions particularly during drought periods. Additionally, some of NUCs water storage tanks are in disrepair and will require refurbishment or replacement. Without a reticulating water supply system, water is distributed through a tanker delivery system that is limited by the availability of water trucks, water production and storage capacity.

Nauru includes the following actions to establish a safe and secure water supply as part of its NDC. Unconditional Contribution Establish NUC water office and laboratory to monitor the quality of water supplied to population Currently Naurus water is tested in foreign test labs. NUC will open a new water test lab that will allow it to monitor the quality of water supplied by NUC to the population on-island. Conditional Contribution Undertake repairs to NUC water storage tanks There have been ongoing challenges with water storage in Nauru. The NUC storage tanks are in poor condition and are deteriorating quickly and are under need or urgent repair. Necessary repairs to the water storage tanks would cost approximately USD 315,000. Additionally, all water storage tanks require structural assessments to confirm their integrity and determine whether refurbishment is possible or whether or replacement is necessary.

There is a need to increase water storage capacity in Nauru in order to provide resilience to drought and other conditions that place high demand on the national water supply system. Increasing capacity to provide sufficient supply for Nauruans will require the installation of additional water storage tanks which would cost approximately USD 530,000 each to install. This project requires financial, technical and capacity support. Conditional Contribution Implement water supply components of the Water and Sanitation Master Plan The Water and Sanitation Master Plan (and the corresponding May 2017 update) provides a detailed proposal to build the necessary water treatment works, water storage facilities, pump stations, reticulation system and household connections, and would cost approximately USD 27M to implement. This project would require financial, technical and capacity support. Conditional Contribution Modeling of impacts of sea level rise and saltwater intrusion into groundwater Given the sea level rise implications of climate change it is imperative that Nauru prepares an assessment of the potential impacts of saltwater intrusion into its groundwater supplies. Conditional Contribution Assess the condition of groundwater supplies An assessment of the current state of groundwater supplies is necessary to determine the levels of contamination from sewerage and other sources. Technical and capacity support will be required to undertake such an assessment.

Adaptation Co-Benefits Mitigation Co-Benefits  Improved water supply, storage and distribution would provide water security in the case of prolonged droughts and other changes in precipitation patterns  Increased resilience of domestic food supply to interruption by climate change-driven impacts  Potential use of groundwater supplies would reduce energy use for water desalination Food security will be increased by improving water supply for home gardens and other agricultural and aquaculture facilities.

Good health and well-being is enhanced by providing clean tested water to reduce the incidence of water borne and water contamination related illness and by eliminating sewage discharge into ground water supplies.

Water security will be increased by providing a modern and reliable water delivery and sewerage system, by eliminating the discharge of untreated household wastewater and by improving water use efficiency.

Climate action will be enhanced by strengthening resilience and adaptive capacity to climate related changes to rain patterns.

Life below water will be enhanced by treating sewage appropriately before discharge into groundwater, lagoons and the ocean.

Life on land will be improved by reducing the discharge of sewage into inland freshwater ecosystems.

Durable partnerships and access to adequate means of implementation will be required to implement these contributions.

In order to elaborate and define the NSDS goal of improved food security through increased local food production the Government of Nauru has developed or is developing a number of food security related national strategic and action plans including, inter alia, Food Security and Nutrition Strategic Plan, Agriculture Strategic Plan, Nauru Climate Smart Agriculture Plan (2021-2025). The Government of Nauru will require technology transfer, capacity building and financial support in order to fully implement these food security related National Strategic and Action Plans. Unconditional Contribution Collect and analyze data on climate change impacts on fisheries and marine resources The Government of Nauru intends to continue to work with SPC to collect data on the impacts of climate change on fisheries and marine resources along with other coastal fisheries and aquaculture related statistical information. Conditional Contribution Develop milkfish farming in support of the development and expansion of aquaculture Nauru intends to develop a USD 3 million aquaculture pilot project that would rehabilitate the Buada Lagoon and Anabar ponds, set up milkfish aquaculture operations and establish management, marketing and retailing operations.

Adaptation Co-Benefits Mitigation Co-Benefits  Improve resilience by collecting data to better understanding climate impacts on agriculture, fisheries and marine resources  Improve resilience by increasing domestic food production  Improve resilience by providing a legislative framework to strengthen governance of fisheries and marine resources SDGs Advanced by Naurus NDC to Improve Food Security Through Increased Local Food Production Food security is enhanced by the development of the Strategic Plan for the Sustainable Development of Agriculture that will provide the blueprint for increased domestic agricultural supply which once implemented will increase food supply and security. The ongoing agricultural technical trials will allow for the refinement of agricultural techniques resulting in higher yields and greater food security. Fisheries and aquaculture-related legislation and data collection will provide a scientific basis and legislative framework to ensure the success of a potential aquaculture technical trial.

Good health and well-being is enhanced by being positioned to provide Nauruan citizens will healthy, high quality, domestically produced agricultural and fish products.

Climate action is enhanced by reducing the need to import foods from long distances for consumption and by improving resiliency by providing local food supplies.

Marine ecosystem resilience will be enhanced by the collection of data to increase the understanding of climate change impacts on fisheries and marine resources and by providing a legislative framework to strengthen governance of fisheries and marine resources Durable partnerships are enhanced by continuing to work with Republic of China (Taiwan) on existing agricultural technical trials and through continued work with SPC to monitor the impacts of climate change on fisheries and marine resources.

Establishing Energy Security Nauru is almost completely reliant on imported fossil fuels for power generation and transport, which has created and continues to impose a significant financial burden and energy supply risks to our country. In 2018, Nauru generated 97% of its electricity from diesel fuel by a fleet of aging and refurbished generators, with the remaining 3% generated from a 500kW solar farm and a scattering of rooftop solar panels.

Develop Nauru Energy Act to create an overarching legislative and governance framework for the energy sector in Nauru and an enabling environment for private sector investment  Create and finance an Energy Infrastructure Investment Fund to establish capital reserve funds dedicated to maintaining Naurus energy infrastructure and to anticipated future costs associated with maintaining Naurus solar capacity  Undertake energy use and supply analysis that considers the impact of recent changes in consumption behavior and the addition of larger-scale solar photovoltaic systems that can inform future energy systems planning  Build in-country capacity to operate and maintain solar photovoltaic and battery storage systems, particularly with a focus to increase gender representation within NUC and generally.

Conditional Contribution Renewable energy comprises half of Naurus power generation  Install 6MW solar photovoltaic farm with 5MW/2.5MW battery capacity  Conduct technical assessment of non-solar sources of renewable energy such as ocean thermal energy conversion and waste-to-energy  Conduct technical assessment of low-carbon transport options  Promote energy efficient air conditioners and other appliances through an expansion of the Low Carbon Fund  Conduct technical assessments to identify effective energy efficiency options for Nauru  Undertake energy audits of government facilities, high-energy usage properties, residential sector to establish baseline data  Rewire government buildings to maximize energy savings and encourage changes in usage behavior among government staff  Adopt an Appliance Labeling and Energy Standard Programme to encourage the import and uptake of low energy usage products  Induce behavioral change to encourage energy efficient behavior via education campaigns for Adaptation Co-Benefits Mitigation Co-Benefits  Infrastructure with increased resilience to climate change impacts and natural disasters  Increased economic resilience and diversification  Increased ability to invest in other sustainable development and climate priorities  Increased access to cleaner and affordable energy  Reduced greenhouse gas emissions  Reduced dependency on fossil-fuel intensive technology and transport  Reduced risk to energy supply chain disruptions Increased participation of women in the energy field through targeted efforts to increase the capacity and participation of women during efforts to build domestic institutional capacity of Naurus energy sector.

Increased access to affordable and clean energy through the uptake of energy efficient practices and greater deployment of renewable energy.

Establishing and maintaining a stable grid and deploying greater renewables will create job opportunities, growth for SMEs, and greater ability to invest in other government priorities.

Achievement of Naurus energy goals resulting in reliable and resilient infrastructure able to deliver stable and affordable power to increase productivity, and free up resources to be invested in other government priorities to enhance Naurus sustainable development and diversify the economy.

The sustainability of communities will be enhanced with infrastructure resilient to disaster and climate change impacts, and establishing sustainable transport options.

Achievement of Naurus energy objectives will result in the reduced consumption of fossil fuels and in fossil-fuel intensive technologies and appliances.

Enhanced renewable energy based power generation and the uptake of energy efficient practices will lead to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and investment in energy infrastructure resilient to climate change impacts and natural disasters.

Successful implementation of Naurus energy objectives will require strong governance and institutions capable of implementing and enforcing energy policies and frameworks.

Durable partnerships, access to adequate means of implementation, and technology transfer will be required to fully achieve these goals.

Enhancement of Waste Management Facility The effective management of waste is a persistent challenge for Nauru. The current dumpsite, which is spread over five hectares, has been in operation for several decades. During this time, the quantity of disposable consumer goods imported into the country has grown significantly, outstripping the capacity of the dumpsite to safely process and store the waste generated. The current waste management facility has clear negative consequences for the local environment. The most dangerous impact stems from leachate, which is produced when rainwater falls on exposed waste. With upgrades to existing facilities and equipment, along with the implementation of best waste management practices, leachate production can be significantly reduced and prevented from draining into neighboring areas and nearby groundwater reserves. Inadequate waste management increases stress on the natural environment. Reducing this stress will significantly increase the resilience of local biodiversity to the negative impacts of climate change. Climate change is also projected to alter precipitation patterns in the North Pacific region, which could pose a significant threat to Naurus water security. Therefore, protecting existing groundwater reserves is an urgent climate change adaptation priority. Enhancing the waste management facilities on Nauru would remove one of the largest stresses on the local water supply. The construction of a new composting facility would improve food security in the country by producing growing medium for local food production and also reduce fugitive methane emissions from the landfill site.

A Remedial Plan identifies a number of actions that can maximize the utility of the existing dump site in Nauru and significantly reduce the negative impacts on groundwater and the surrounding environment. Nauru includes the following three actions as part of its NDC. Unconditional Contribution Improve organization and physical structure of dumpsite cells to prevent contamination of groundwater supplies More efficient organization of the site will reduce the volume of rainwater that comes into contact with exposed waste. A liner system, simple leachate collection and treatment, and good waste placement and compaction practices will further limit discharges to the environment. Surface and rainwater successfully diverted from open dumping areas can be treated as clean water to supplement other existing freshwater reserves and be potentially used in on-site composting of organic waste. Changes at the site will include:

Development of Landfill Master Plan and Operations Plan,  Improving the design of the dumping area, including staging of cell development and filling,  Consolidating the historic waste on the site, either in constructed cells or specific areas,  Developing cell(s) for controlled dumping of waste,  Compacting waste placed in the new landfill cell(s),  Maintaining stockpile of suitable material for cover and construction of bunds and cap on-site, and  Keeping the active tipping area as small as possible to minimise the amount of rainwater falling on open waste dumping areas.

Consolidating existing waste on-site and specifying specific areas for future filling provides an opportunity to develop other parts of the site for the resource recovery activities described in the following sections. These changes will require capital investment and ongoing resourcing, including suitable equipment (i.e. bulldozer, digger and/or loader) for operation and ongoing construction and maintenance activity. Support for these efforts is not provided for by any partners, however Nauru is seeking support from potential partners to develop the above-mentioned changes:

Phase Cost Timeframe Development of Landfill Master Plan and Operations and Management Plan Unconditional Contribution Build new resource recovery facility for inorganic waste The volume of waste stored at the landfill can be significantly reduced by the construction of a new resource recovery facility for inorganic waste. Recoverable materials include surplus tyres, unwanted white goods, scrap steel, aluminum containers, and recycled plastics. Tyres have continuing value for communities for use in landscaping, and their re-use can significantly reduce the risk of fire at the landfill. Stockpiling of unwanted white goods can supply appliance repairers with spare parts. Securing equipment for disassembly, cutting and compacting would facilitate the recovery and export of scrap steel. Aluminum cans are easily collected, and attract strong prices internationally. Collection of plastic drink containers for export and recycling is also worthy of consideration, though measures to minimize the use of plastics are also being pursued.

The new facility recovery facility is being developed with the support of the Government of Japan and the Ridge2Reef Initiative, and will require financial support of approximately USD 550,000. The recovery facility is expected to be operational by 2021. Conditional Contribution Build new organic waste recovery and composting facility Nauru has a climate that is well-suited for composting of organic waste materials. Greater availability of compost will significantly contribute to land rehabilitation efforts under the Higher Ground Initiative as the top layer in the backfilling of mined areas. Compost can also accelerate efforts to increase domestic food production, both as a growing media for household gardens and any future large-scale agriculture on Topside. Compost can also be used for re-establishing native vegetation once areas are rehabilitated. Although no data currently available, it can also reasonably be expected that composting would reduce fugitive methane emissions. Under the Master Plan a composting facility will be constructed at the current Nauru dump site, which would include provision for pre-processing of materials (shredding, blending), space for several windrows of composting material and stockpile of mature compost. Funding of approximately USD 60,000 for construction will be provided by India South South Cooperation. The target for completing this contribution is 2021.

Adaptation Co-Benefits Mitigation Co-Benefits  Increase resilience of natural ecosystems  Reduce methane emissions  Enhance water security by reducing leachate intrusion into groundwater  Increase food security through production of compost for agriculture Mitigation Good health and well-being will be enhanced by reducing local pollution and risk of fire.

Clean water and sanitation will be improved by significantly reducing leachate, which contaminates groundwater supplies.

Enhanced waste management infrastructure will augment sustainability efforts and create economic opportunities from resource recovery and composting.

Sustainability of communities will be enhanced by reducing the impacts of pollution and risk of fire, and by encouraging recycling and composting.

Sustainable consumption will be encouraged through the adoption of complementary waste management policies in order to reduce the total volume of waste that must be processed.

Climate action will be enhanced by reducing the risk to water security and vulnerable marine ecosystems Marine ecosystem resilience will be enhanced by reducing runoff into coastal ecosystems.

Partnerships with the Pacific Community and the Government of India are already assisting with implementation and additional finance will be required to fully implement the composting facility.

Ecosystem Restoration and Sustainable Land Management to improve livelihoods and protect biodiversity Before mining began, Nauru was thickly covered with tropical rainforest dominated in parts by the Pacific mahogany (Ijo or Tomano) tree and pandanus. The land was managed by an agroforestry system, whereby productive tree species were planted, tended, and cultivated within an environment that was otherwise largely unmodified. Decades of phosphate mining have had a significant impact on the natural environment. In addition, the increasing environmental pressures associated with economic development, such as greater consumption of consumer goods and production of waste, are an ongoing challenge for a country with limited land area. Many of the native species have been extirpated or are on the verge of extirpation from the island. Although non recorded plant species are endemic to Nauru, some are rare, and their conservation is of global relevance. As highlighted in the Rapid Biodiversity Assessment of Nauru, there remain valuable pockets of natural flora and fauna that are worth protecting and restoring. And although greatly outnumbered by introduced species, the indigenous plant species still constitute the most culturally- useful and ecologically-important species. Due to the unique adaptability of indigenous Pacific island plants to the harsh conditions of coastal and small-island environments, and their cultural and ecological utility, their protection and enhancement are crucial as a basis for sustainable development on Nauru. Restoration of key sites will also aid in recovery of declining bird and other animal species and in maintaining future food security. Climate change impacts, particularly drought, will increase stress on the natural environment, which makes reducing other stressors an urgent priority. Supported in part by the Global Environment Facility, Nauru will build the foundation for a transition from mining to sustainable development in Nauru by designing and testing integrated strategies for natural resource management and outlining the financial benefits of improved land use planning and options for increasing productivity. The expected outcomes of the project will create an enabling environment for scaling-up and mainstreaming biodiversity, sustainable land management, and land degradation neutrality into priority sectors. The project has four components:

1) Strengthening policy and institutional capacity for sustainable land management and biodiversity conservation, 2) Rehabilitation and restoration of degraded land to protect and reinstate ecosystem services in Nauru, 3) Conservation and sustainable use of Naurus remaining forests, and 4) Capacity building and knowledge sharing to enable scaling up towards land degradation neutrality and biodiversity conservation. The project will help restore agricultural productivity in a highly degraded agro-forestry system by improving soil management and increasing soil organic matter content, increasing the vegetation and tree coverage. The project will also mainstream biodiversity conservation into priority sectors (agriculture, tourism, mining and infrastructure development) through land-use planning to ensure that land and resource use maximize production without undermining biodiversity. Lastly, the project will address direct drivers of terrestrial biodiversity loss in Nauru by creating a protected area (Anibare Bay) and implementing sustainable forest management practices in priority areas of important biodiversity and cultural value.

Unconditional Contribution Develop Land Use & Restoration Plan and begin implementation The Land Use and Restoration Plan developed, in consultation with the communities and land owners, to guide decision-making, land use management and facilitate mainstreaming of biodiversity into priority sectors to ensure that land and resource use maximize production without undermining biodiversity. Unconditional Contribution Pilot soil restoration methods and SLM techniques Adaptation Co-Benefits  Increased resilience of sensitive ecosystems to climate change impacts  Increased resilience of local water supply to climate change-induced drought by through improved hydrological cycle and ground water recharge  Increased resilience to climate change-induced interruption of affordable food imports through expansion of agro-forestry practices to increase local food production Food security is enhanced by increasing local production through expansion of agro-forestry methods.

Water security is enhanced by the restoration of natural ecosystems to increase ground water recharge.

Resilience to climate change is enhanced by building the resilience of sensitive ecosystems to negative climate change impacts through the reduction of other local, anthropogenic stresses and the mainstreaming of sustainable land use planning and land degradation neutrality, with additional climate change adaptation co- benefits in the areas of food and water security.

Local biodiversity is enhanced by establishing a protected area in Anibare Bay, identified as Naurus most important and diverse terrestrial ecosystem, as well as through the wider use of sustainable land management to curb unsustainable development around the island.

Durable partnerships and access to adequate means of implementation will be critical to the implementation of this contribution, which will include funding provided by the national government and the Global Environment Facility, as well as technical support from the Taiwan Technical Mission.

An assessment of the current state of household cesspits is necessary to determine which cesspits are in need of repairs or replacement to ensure that they are not leaking waste into Naurus already limited groundwater supplies. Additionally, building codes or other safeguards for sewerage discharge and cesspits need to be developed and effectively implemented.

Adaptation Co-Benefits Mitigation Co-Benefits  Improved resilience by better protection of groundwater supplies  Reduced emissions from need to pump and truck sewage  Increased use of groundwater will reduce demand for water from electricity intensive RO plants Good health and well-being is enhanced by providing clean, tested water to reduce the incidence of water borne and water contamination related illness and by eliminating sewage discharge into ground water supplies.

Water security will be increased by providing a modern and reliable water delivery and sewerage system, by eliminating the discharge of untreated household waste water and by improving water use efficiency.

Climate action will be enhanced by strengthening resilience and adaptive capacity to climate related changes to rain patterns.

Life below water will be enhanced by treating sewage appropriately before discharge into groundwater, lagoons and the ocean.

Life on land will be improved by reducing the discharge of sewage into inland freshwater ecosystems.

Durable partnerships and access to adequate means of implementation will be required to implement these contributions.

Institutional and Governance Arrangements to Support Implementation of Climate Priorities Prepare and approve the Strategic Plan for the Sustainable Development of Agriculture The Government of Nauru intends to prepare and endorse the Strategic Plan for the Sustainable Development of Agriculture, which will detail a plan to further develop Naurus agricultural capacity. Implementation of this plan will be closely linked to the Higher Ground Initiative. Unconditional Contribution Prepare and approve the National Coastal Fisheries Management Plan The Government of Nauru intends to prepare a National Coastal Fisheries Management Plan in accordance with the Coastal Fisheries and Aquaculture Act 2020. Unconditional Contribution Prepare and approve the National Aquaculture Plan The Government of Nauru intends to prepare a National Aquaculture Plan in accordance with the Coastal Fisheries and Aquaculture Act 2020.

Adaptation Co-Benefits Mitigation Co-Benefits  Improved coordination of Government Ministries in adaptation actions  Increased effectiveness of implementation efforts  Improved coordination of Government Ministries in mitigation actions  Increased effectiveness of implementation efforts SDGs Advanced by Naurus NDC to Establish Stronger Institutional and Governance Arrangements Strong and transparent governance and institutions will ensure womens full and effective participation and equal opportunities in the consultation and decision- making process, which will also translate into greater educational and economic opportunities for women as a part of Naurus sustainable and low-carbon future.

Improved governance and institutions could encourage increased official development assistance and foreign direct investment to Nauru, a country with great need of support from partners to successfully implement its national plans and programming.

Strong governance and institutions for climate change and sustainable development are important for the successful implementation of Naurus climate objectives, as well as to build domestic and international confidence in Naurus institutions.

Successful adoption and implementation of Naurus Climate Change Bill and Policy would ensure accountability and transparency, as well as to ensure inclusive and representative consultation and decision- making processes. Stronger governance will establish institutions capable of implementing and enforcing climate policies and frameworks.

Strong and transparent governance and institutions will support Naurus efforts to build durable partnerships, increase access to adequate means of implementation and encourage technology transfer and capacity support to Nauru.

National Long-Term Risk Assessment The collective failure of the world to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions to a level consistent with a rise in average global temperatures of less than 1.5C has increased the risk Nauru will experience significant loss and damage from the adverse effects of climate change. Like other SIDS and particularly vulnerable developing countries, Nauru will require an international response to help it cope with climate change impacts that cannot be avoided and result in loss and damage, including loss of economic opportunities, regression in development indicators, loss of natural ecosystems and ecosystem services, and loss of secure, habitable land. The framework for addressing loss and damage under the UNFCCC process must be able to assist particularly vulnerable developing countries to assess risks that result in loss and damage, quantify the extent of the loss and damage, and assist with damage reduction and risk mitigation measures, and with recovery. The kinds of impacts that this loss and damage framework must address are set out in decision 3/CP.18, namely impacts from extreme weather events and slow onset events, and should also include non-economic losses and damages, migration, displacement and human mobility. Conditional Contribution Conduct a national long-term risk assessment on climate change loss and damage Nauru intends to conduct a long-term risk assessment (LTRA). The LTRA should be conducted through processes consistent with those agreed and established at the UNFCCC under the Warsaw International Mechanism to address Loss and Damage, The LTRA should include the following:

Quantification of the specific risks of loss and damage under different temperature scenarios;  Timing at which these risks are likely to be experienced;  Economic and social costs of the impacts associated with these risks, including preparation and maintenance of inventories of national assets at risk;  Non-economic losses and damages; and  Options available and under development to manage, transfer, and share risks, as well as for recovery.

Climate action will be enhanced by fostering a more detailed and comprehensive understanding of the risks associated with climate change, as well as the options available for mitigating those risks.

Durable partnerships and access to adequate means of implementation, particularly through cooperation under the Warsaw International Mechanism, will be required for implementation.

