Norway seeks to fulfil the enhanced ambition through the climate cooperation with the European Union.

3rd 2015. This included accompanying information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding, with reference to decisions 1/CP.19 and 1/CP.20.

1 The Climate Change Act establishes by law Norways previous NDC from 2020. The Government will make an proposal to Parliament in order to amend the Act to update the target in line with this NDC.

The updated NDC will be presented to Parliament for its consideration.

Further information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding (ICTU) of Norway's NDC Annex to this submission, as applicable to its nationally determined contribution.

(2) Regulation on greenhouse gas emissions and removals from land use, land use change and forestry included in Protocol 31 of the EEA Agreement for the period 2021  2030 (Regulation (EU) 2018/841 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 on the inclusion of greenhouse gas emissions and removals from land use, land use change and forestry).

Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) of Norway for the timeframe 2021-2030 Norway is committed to a target by at least 55 per cent reduction in greenhouse gas emission compared to 1990 levels.

Information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding (ICTU) of Norway's NDC Para Guidance in decision 4/CMA.1 ICTU guidance as applicable to Norway's NDC 1 Quantifiable information on the reference point (including, as appropriate, a base year):

The reference indicator will be quantified based on national total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, except LULUCF, in the base year 1990 reported in Norway's National Inventory Report (NIR). The base year emission level was about 51 Mt CO2-equivalents.

Emissions and removals from the LULUCF sector that are additional will be accounted for when assessing achievement of the target.

Not applicable.

At least 55 per cent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions compared to 1990 levels.

The reference indicator will be quantified based on national total GHG emissions in 1990 as reported in Norway's National Inventory Report and Biennial Transparency Report.

The national total GHG emissions in 1990 may be updated and recalculated due to continuous methodological improvements. Information on updates will be included in the Biennial Transparency Report.

2 Time frames and/or periods for implementation:

Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA);

Single-year target in 2030.

3 Scope and coverage:

(a) General description of the target; Economy-wide, emission reductions by at least 55 per cent in 2030 compared to base year (1990) emissions. The target covers all sectors and greenhouse gases.

Norway seeks to fulfil the updated NDC through the climate cooperation with the European Union. If necessary, Norway will use voluntary cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement to fulfil the part that goes beyond what is achieved through the climate cooperation with the European Union.

Information will be provided in Norway's NIR and the Biennial Transparency Report that will be consistent with the IPCC guidelines.

Energy, industrial processes and product use, agriculture, land-use, land-use change and forestry, and waste.

Gases Carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) and nitrogen trifluoride (NF3). For the land-use, land-use change and forestry sector, emissions and removals the following reporting categories are included: forest land, cropland, grassland, and wetland (wetland remaining wetland only from 2026), including land use changes between the categories, and between these categories and settlements and other land. The five carbon pools above-ground biomass, below-ground biomass, litter, dead wood and soil organic matters are included. In addition, the carbon pool harvested wood products is included.

Norway's NIR chapter 1.7 describes the sources considered insignificant and reported as not estimated. The NIR provides justifications for exclusion in terms of the likely level of emissions and how these are in line with the thresholds specified in decision 24/CP.19. A similar approach, consistent with decision 18/CMA.1 will be used for reporting under the Paris Agreement.

Not applicable.

4 Planning processes:

The NDC target of reducing emissions by at least 55 per cent in 2030 compared to 1990 is the second update to Norways first NDC.

In Norways first NDC submission the target was to reduce emissions of at least 40 per cent by 2030 compared to 1990. That target was approved by the Parliament in 2015. Further, the target was established by law in the Climate Change Act adopted by the Parliament in June 2017. In October 2019 the EU, Iceland and Norway formally agreed to cooperate to fulfil their respective emission reduction targets of at least 40 per cent by 2030. The strategy for implementation was approved by the Parliament 26th April 2018.

In February 2020 Norway updated its NDC, and enhanced its target to reduce emissions by at least 50 towards 55 per cent by 2030. In June 2021 the Parliament adopted changes in the Climate Change Act and established that updated target by law.

In October 2022 the new Norwegian Government presented its Climate Status and Plan. The main policy instruments are taxation of greenhouse gas emissions, regulatory measures including the emissions trading scheme, climate-related requirements in public procurement processes, information on climate-friendly options, financial support for the development of new technologies, such as CCS, and initiatives to promote research and innovation. More information on policies and measures in place are described in Norway's reporting under the UNFCCC and will be updated in the reporting under the Paris Agreement.

Institutional arrangements: the emission reduction target for 2030 was established through interministerial processes.

Through the climate cooperation with the European Union and Iceland, Norway has specific legislation for the period 2021-2030 covering all emissions and sectors:

1. The EU Emission Trading System (ETS) regulates emissions from industrial plants, power plants, the petroleum industry and commercial aviation within the European Economic Area. About half of Norwegian greenhouse gas emissions are covered by the ETS. Norway has been a part of the ETS since 2008 on the same terms as EU Member States.

2. The Effort Sharing Regulation (ESR) regulates emissions from transport, agriculture, buildings and waste management and emissions from industry and petroleum not covered by the ETS. The Effort Sharing Regulation sets binding national targets. These targets can be fulfilled through domestic emission reductions and/or by use of flexible mechanisms within the EU framework.

3. The Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) Regulation regulates emissions and removals for the land use, land use change and forestry sector. The regulation sets a national commitments to ensure that emissions do not exceed removals in this sector.

The Ministry of Climate and Environment has the overarching cross-sectoral responsibility for coordination and implementation. The Ministry of Finance is responsible for the tax schemes and the other ministries are responsible for policies in their respective sectors.

Further details on institutional arrangements are found in Norway's National Communication to the UNFCCC and will be reported under the Enhanced Transparency Framework of the Paris Agreement.

The Environmental Information Act, implementing the Aarhus Convention, establish public participation in decision making processes relevant for the environment. The Public Administration Act requires legal proposals to be subject for public hearings. Consequently, the Climate Change Act was on a public hearing including all stakeholders.

For consultations with indigenous people, Sami People, procedures for consultation processes between the central government and the Smediggi, established in 2005, constitute a crucial framework for ensuring Sami rights under international law to participate in processes that may affect them.

a.

b.

c.

a. Information on national circumstances can be found in Norway's National Communication to the UNFCCC.

b. Norway has a process for involving the Parliament in developing the target and implementing policies. According to the Climate Change Act the Government shall each year submit to the Parliament updated information on status and progress in achieving the climate targets under the law. This ensures broad political ownership of the target and transparency while progressing towards the achievement of the target. c. Just transition: Norway has an extensive system for social protection and institutionalised tripartite dialogue between the government, trade unions and labour organisations already in the 1960ties. This serves, amongst others, to stabilize the economy and work life in periods of transition. It is a priority for the Government to facilitate the creation of profitable green jobs through pricing, public procurement, regulations and measures that supports technology development.

Human Rights: Human rights are enshrined in the The Norwegian Constitution. The Human Rights Act establishes the main conventions on human rights as Norwegian law. This act prevail over other Norwegian legislation in case of conflicts between norms.

Food security: There is a scarcity of agricultural land in Norway especially suitable for arable crops. Norway's role in global food security in the context of climate change is to adapt to a changing climate, manage and use these resources sustainably, to secure food supplies while emissions of greenhouse gases are reduced.

Gender equality: In 2018, a new and comprehensive Equality and Anti-Discrimination Act entered into force. The Act's purpose is to promote gender equality. The Act provides protection against discrimination on the basis of gender, pregnancy, leave in connection with birth or adoption and care responsibilities. Women and men are to be given equal opportunities in education and work, and in their cultural and professional development.

General and sector specific legislation, support, taxation and other measures are in place to protect and avoid, reduce or manage adverse impacts on climate and environment and provide for broad access to information participation and justice. Civil society is broadly and actively engaged.

1618, of the Paris Agreement;

Agreement;

Norway participated in the Talanoa Dialogue in the context of the Paris Decision 1/CP.21 during 2018. In Norway two Talanoa Dialogues were held. One between the Minister of Climate and Environment and mayors (municipalities) and one initiated by Norwegian environmental organisations and the Parliament. Norway's climate targets and policies are developed in the context of best available science and hence the IPCC Special Report on 1.5 degrees and the 2021/2022 IPCC working group reports, have provided central context to the nationally determined contribution.

5 Assumptions and methodological approaches, including those for estimating and accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and, as appropriate, removals:

Norway will at the latest by 31 December 2024 report a GHG inventory in accordance with 18/CMA.1 and report on progress towards its nationally determined contribution. For accounting relevant information, Norway will use the accounting guidance in 4/CMA.1. For IPCC methodologies and metrics, see 5 (d).

Final accounting towards the target, that is expected to take place in 2032/3, may depend on further arrangements in Norway's cooperation with the EU and Iceland. Any use of internationally transferred mitigation outcomes within that framework will be included in Norway's accounting, consistent with the approach used by the EU and Iceland.

Not applicable.

Norway's current GHG inventory is in accordance with decision 24/CP.19 and hence the IPCC 2006 Guidelines, the 2013 Revised Supplementary Methods and Good Practice Guidance Arising from the Kyoto Protocol (IPCC 2013 KP Supplement) and the 2013 Supplement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for the National Greenhouse Gas Inventories:

Wetlands (IPCC 2013 Wetlands Supplement).

IPCC 2006 guidelines, IPCC 2013 KP Supplement and parts of IPCC 2013 Wetlands Supplement will be used for estimating GHG emissions and removals. Global warming potentials (GWP) for a 100 year time horizon from the IPCCs fifth Assessment Report will be used to calculate CO2 equivalents.

(e) Sector-, category- or activity-specific assumptions, methodologies and approaches consistent with IPCC guidance, as appropriate, including, as applicable:

Emissions and subsequent removals from natural disturbances on afforested land and managed forest land may be excluded from the accounting if the emissions from the natural disturbance exceed the average emissions caused by natural disturbances in the period 2001- 2020, excluding outliers (background level), if calculated as in accordance with Art 10 and Annex VI of Regulation (EU) 2018/841.

Norway uses the production approach to account for emissions and removals from harvested wood products, as defined in the IPCC Guidelines. This is in accordance with Art. 9 and Annex V of Regulation (EU) 2018/841.

Within the climate cooperation with the European Union and Iceland agreed in relation to the implementation of the 40 per cent targets (see para 4 a), emissions and removals in managed forests in the period 2021  2030 will be accounted for as the deviation from a projected forward-looking forest reference level, with regards to dynamic age-related forests characteristics, as in accordance with Art. 8 and Annex IV of Regulation (EU) 2018/841. estimating corresponding emissions and removals, including:

Within the climate cooperation with the European Union and Iceland emissions and removals from the land sector will be accounted for based on specific accounting rules for the different land categories in regulation (EU) 2018/841, Art 6-8 and Annex IV: - Zero is the baseline for afforested land and deforested land (gross-net accounting) - The average emissions between 2005-2009 is the baseline for managed cropland, managed grassland and managed wetlands (net-net accounting) - A forest reference level based on the continuation of sustainable forest management practice in the period 2000-2009 is the baseline for managed forest land.

Not applicable.

Not applicable5.

Not applicable.

5 Norway has an active policy also for limiting emissions of short lived climate forcers as described in reporting under the UNFCCC.

Agreement, if applicable.

As explained in para 3 (a) Norway has an agreement with the European Union and Iceland to fulfil the previous emission reduction target of at least 40 per cent emission reduction. The current EU climate framework referred to in 4 a (i) does not open for the use of internationally transferred mitigation outcomes from outside the EU/EEA. Norway also seeks to fulfil the updated NDC of least 55 per cent reductions through the climate cooperation with the European Union. Final accounting towards the target may depend on any further arrangements in Norway's cooperation with the European Union and Iceland, including in the European Trading System.

If necessary, Norway will use voluntary cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement to fulfil the part that goes beyond what is achieved through the climate cooperation with the European Union.

Norway will report on progress towards its nationally determined contribution through the transparency framework under the Paris Agreement, and account for its cooperation with the European Union in a manner consistent with the guidance adopted by CMA and further guidance agreed by the CMA.

6 How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances:

Norway's approach to consider fairness and ambition is to assess how its nationally determined contribution contributes to meeting the global long-term goal of the Paris Agreement, with weight on pursuing efforts to limit the global warming to 1.5 degree increase, taking into account fairness and equity. The most important basis for such an assessment is the IPCC reports. For example, by taking into account the remaining global carbon dioxide emission budget and the need for deep reductions in other greenhouse gases, consistent with achieving the temperature goal of the Paris Agreement. In considering fairness and equity, Norway takes into account national circumstances, including the fact that Norway is a high-income country that should undertake ambitious emission reduction targets. These considerations lay the basis for Norways nationally determined contribution to be in line with the principles of the Paris Agreement, the Norwegian Climate Change Act and align with the global long-term temperature goal of the Paris Agreement.

A key finding in the IPCC report ,that has been considered, is that achieving the Paris temperature goal requires rapid, deep and sustained emission reductions in all sectors. To keep 1.5C within reach, global emissions need to be reduced by about 43 percent by 2030 compared to 2019, and by about 27 percent by 2030 to limit global warming to 2C degree increase.

Norway's nationally determined contribution is to reduce emissions with at least 55 per cent by 2030. Norways NDC reflects a path towards 2050 that goes beyond most average reductions in the global emissions pathways towards 2050 needed to keep global warming in line with the global long-term goal of the Paris Agreement. Norway consider its target to be fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances.

Norway also provides significant support that contribute to emission reductions in developing countries. These efforts also contribute to achieve the Paris temperature goal, and Norways efforts are thus wider than what is covered by our NDC.

See 6a.

Norway's updated and strengthened nationally determined contribution represents a progression beyond its previously communicated nationally determined contributions It is an ambitious target for Norway to achieve by 2030. Norway has considered how to increase ambition, and Norway believes the strongest way of doing this is to do on a European basis, together with the European Union. The achievement of the target is dependent on a broad set of mitigation measures. The implementation of the enhanced NDC for 2030 will be an important part of Norway's process of transforming to a low-emission society by 2050.

Not applicable.

Not applicable.

7 How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2:

Convention as set out in its Article 2;

Norway regards the long-term target of the Paris Agreement to be in line with Article 2 of the Convention. The answer to this question is therefore explained under 6a.

See 6a and 7a.

