1/CP.20; Article 24, decision 1/CP.21; Articles 4.1, 4.7 and 4.15 of the Paris Agreement as well as Katowice Rulebook of COP24.

As a developing country, the Kingdom of Bahrain is actively pursuing economic diversification considering sustainability as the pillar of its growth. Despite its low annual GHG footprint, estimated approximately below 0.1% of the global GHG footprint, the Kingdom of Bahrain strives to avoid and reduce emissions in its economic development. As per Article 4.7 of the Paris Agreement, at the core of this NDC is mitigation co-benefits resulting from adaptation actions and economic diversification plans.

Bahrain enjoys a rich social milieu, with diverse communities living side by side in primarily high-density urban contexts throughout the island. Several key aspects of Bahrains social fabric are described in the subsections that follow. In 2021, total population is slightly over 1.5 million with roughly half of the population comprised of expatriates who come to pursue work opportunities. Most of the population is centered in the capital, Al Manamah and other major urban centers like Al Muharraq, Al Riffa and Hamad Town.

Economic diversification with mitigation-co benefits Launched in 2017, the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) lays out a comprehensive set of initiatives to improve national energy efficiency in Bahrain. The Plan identifies 22 initiatives across all sectors to achieve a national target of 6% which was adopted by Cabinet. The target is set as a reduction of energy consumption in the year 2025, expressed as a percentage of the average final energy consumption.

Launched in the same year, the National Renewable Energy Action Plan (NREAP) identified feasible solar, wind and biogas renewable energy options for Bahrain, establishing national renewable energy targets, also adopted by Cabinet, of 5% of peak capacity by 2025 and 10% by 2035.

Adaptation Climate change impacts have already been observed in Bahrain and are further elaborated on in the Third National Communication Report. The Kingdom of Bahrain has undertaken climate change vulnerability and impact assessments that have addressed four key areas: Water, agriculture, biodiversity and urban development.

Bahrain has no choice but to implement urgent measures to build resilience, improve disaster risk preparedness and response, and adapt to the increasingly adverse impacts of climate change in future. Indeed, there are substantially higher costs associated with adaptation to future impacts of climate change in Bahrain, if actions are initially delayed or ignored. At present, the action being taken to address the issue of adaptation is executed with limited capacities and resources, with a need for a more comprehensive and articulated adaptation package with support from the international community, Green Climate Fund (GCF) and the UNFCCC. The Kingdom of Bahrain is undertaking the following actions to adapt to climate change:

Coastal Zones Coastal Resilience to Sea-Level Rise has been included in the Ministry infrastructures. following these stages:

Bahrain also adopted and implements national disaster risk reduction strategies in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 20152030.

Beyond classical adaptation actions, Article 4.7 in the PA states that Mitigation co- benefits resulting from Parties adaptation actions and/or economic diversification can contribute to mitigation outcomes. Henceforth Bahrain launched several projects that concurs this concept such as:

4,800 seedlings being planted in 2019 alone.

Bahrain will actively pursue the synergies between mitigation and adaptation exploring adaptation actions with mitigation benefits and vice versa.

Economic Development and Diversification Bahrain Bourse (Bahrain Stock Market) joined the Sustainable Stock Exchange (SSE) initiative in 2019, reinforcing its commitment to promote sustainable and transparent capital markets. Companies in Bahrain will have to disclose Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) information, and are expected to create shared value and inclusive growth, to assess their impacts on capitals and resources, and to contribute to national, regional and global visions and plans.

In addition, the Government has adopted a strategic plan to develop six key economic sectors, namely financial services, information and communication technology, industry, logistics, tourism, and oil. Several initiatives have been implemented to increase the volume of foreign and local investments and create job opportunities. Many initiatives have already been implemented such as a new tourism strategy, new measures to streamline visa procedures, new legislation to encourage foreign investors, a comprehensive strategy for the development of the logistics sector, and a national strategy to revive the pearling industry.

These initiatives will continue to contribute to positive growth in the Kingdoms non-oil sector, strengthening its contribution to GDP, increasing sustainable development and further enhancing diversification while reinforcing the pivotal role of the private sector as the major driver of growth.

The Kingdom of Bahrain strives to avoid and reduce emissions in its economic development. As per Article 4.7 of the Paris Agreement, at the core of this NDC is mitigation co-benefits resulting from adaptation actions and economic diversification plans.

The Kingdom of Bahrain has taken major steps towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) set by the United Nations General Assembly, aligning its national development agenda accordingly. As a result, the Kingdom of Bahrain has established many governmental institutions, organizations, and committees to develop the programs, policies, and strategies to achieve sustainability in its various dimensions. It has also enacted a number of laws and regulations related to the achievement of sustainable development, which has become an international demand in the midst of the current economic, political and social changes that the global community witnesses currently.

Means of Implementation The elaboration of this NDC includes a public participatory process through a series of multi- sectorial meetings and has been reviewed by the National Climate Change Committee. This intended contribution is communicated under the assumption of the adoption of a universal, legally binding instrument that fully respects the principles and provisions of the UNFCCC, in particular the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, equity, and respective capabilities. The domestic actions communicated in this NDC are voluntary and will be implemented in accordance with the principles and provisions of the Convention, in particular Article 4 paragraph 1, 7 and 8.

The Kingdom of Bahrain recognizes that the extent to which it will meet its obligations under the UNFCCC, PA will depend highly on the level of international support in means of implementation. Therefore, mitigation and adaptation stipulations are meant to inform and will be undertaken in the context of support on finance, technology- transfer, and capacity building.

Bahrain will periodically review the mitigation and adaptation measures mentioned in the NDCs to ensure that efforts are implemented.

Bahrain will have a specific monitoring and evaluation plan for the adaptation, for monitoring and reviewing and verification of projects and policies.

In implementation of its NDC, Bahrain will consider voluntary cooperation and cooperative approaches that involve the use of internationally transferred mitigation outcomes as per Article 6 of the Paris Agreement. For the Kingdom of Bahrain such cooperation and cooperative approaches will be multi-metric in their nature and include not only GHG but also other related parameters such as renewable energy, energy efficiency etc.

Technology Innovation and Deployment The Kingdom of Bahrain considers technology innovation and deployment at scale as a vital enabler of its NDC and for achieving the Paris Agreement goals. Bahrain supports key technologies such as carbon capture and utilization, direct air capture and others which are necessary for hard-to-abate sectors.

Response measures The Kingdom of Bahrain is impacted not only by physical climate change consequences but also the negative result of climate change policies made beyond its borders. Managing response measures to minimize their economic and social consequence in Bahrain is one of the key priorities for Bahrain to achieve sustainable growth.

As outlined in Article 4.15 of the Paris Agreement, the international community needs to take into account economies most affected by the impacts of response measures, particularly developing country Parties.

Given its small island and developing country status, historically low GHG footprint (estimated as approximately below 0.1% of the global GHG footprint), ongoing economic diversification, physical impacts of climate change, the Kingdom of Bahrain considers this NDC as ambitious and fair. To correctly utilize its limited resources, Bahrain will prioritize adaptation actions (especially those with mitigation co-benefits) over mitigation.

