Design sample Pakistan Updated Nationally Determined Contributions (8).pdf CHAPTER 2 THE NATIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE CONTEXT 2.1. NDC Update Process 18 2.2. Institutional Arrangements 19 2.3. New Identified Areas 19 2.4. Stocktaking of Pak-NDC 2016 20 CHAPTER 3 CLIMATE VULNERABILITIES, RISKS, & COSTS 3.1 Climate Vulnerability Trends 22 3.2 Climate Impact Drivers (CIDs) 23 3.3 Compound Extreme Weather 3.4 Socio-economic dimensions 24 22 CHAPTER 4 MITIGATION: EFFORTS, ACHIEVEMENTS & NDCs 4.1 Policy Initiatives 26 4.3 Contributions to Mitigation 31 CHAPTER 5 ADAPTATION: EFFORTS, ACHIEVEMENTS & NDCS 5.1 Policy Initiatives 38 5.3 Contributions to Adaptation 47 38 CHAPTER 6 CROSS-CUTTERS & CO-BENEFITS 6.1 Gender Equality 52 6.2 Youth and Volunteer Engagement 59 6.3 Sustainable Development Goals 59 CHAPTER 1 NATIONAL VISION FOR CLIMATE ACTION CHAPTER 7 NDC TARGETS & MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION 7.1 Priority Actions 62 62 CHAPTER 8 CAPACITY ASSESSMENT & NEEDS 8.1 Whole-of-Government Approach 66 8.2 Implementation Mechanisms 67 8.3 Technology Development & CHAPTER 9 CLIMATE FINANCE, MARKET & NON-MARKET BASE APPROACHES 9.1 Climate Finance 70 9.2 Public-Private Partnerships 72 70 CHAPTER 10 CLARITY, TRANSPARENCY AND UNDERSTANDING 10.1 GHG Inventory 2018 73 10.2 Monitoring, Reporting and PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 20214 LIST OF TABLES Table 4.1: Mitigation Policy Action in Six Sectors Table 4.2: Overarching Mitigation Objectives & Supporting Initiatives Table 5.1: Strengthening Policies, Strategies and Action Plans Table 5.2: Key Adaptation Sectors & Supporting Actions Table 5.3: Supporting Adaptation Actions & Indicators Table 6.1: Gender Mainstreaming Actions & Potential Targets Table 6.2: SDG Objectives, Actions & Indicators Table 10.1: Summary of GHG Emissions (2017-18) LIST OF FIGURES Fg.1.1: Voluntary and Conditional Reduction of 50% below its projected BAU Fg.1.2: Pakistan WB commitments and Climate co-Benefits (millions US$ and percent of total commitments) PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 5 LIST OF ACRONYMS ADB Asian Development Bank AEDB Alternative and Renewable Energy Development Board AFOLU Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land use ARE 2019 Alternative and Renewable Energy Policy 2019 BTAP Billion Trees Afforestation Project BTR Biennial Transparency Report CBDRM Community Based Disaster Risk Management CCA Climate Change Adaptation CCGAP Climate Change Gender Action Plan CDWP Central Development Working Party Meeting CGPI  2019 Clean Green Pakistan Index 2019 CIACA Collaborative Instruments for Ambitious Climate Action CIF Climate Investment Fund CPEC China - Pakistan Economic Corridor CPI Carbon Pricing Instrument CPPA-G Central Power Purchasing Agency-Guarantee CSOs Civil Society Organizations DWP Development Working Party EIA Environmental Impact Assessment EPA Environmental Protection Agency ESL Energy Standards and Labeling ESRF Ecosystem Restoration Fund ESRI Ecosystem Restoration Initiative ETF Enhanced Transparency Framework FCPF Forest Carbon Partnership Facility PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 20216 FFC Federal Flood Commission GCISC Global Change Impact Studies Centre GEF Global Environment Facility GHI Global Horizontal Irradiation / Irradiance GIS Geographic Information System GIZ Deutsche Gesellschaft fr Internationale Zusammenarbeit (German International Development Agency) GLOF Glacial Lake Outburst Floods GCMs General Circulation Models GtCO!e Giga Tonnes Carbon dioxide equivalent HiAP Health in All Policies IFC International Finance Corporation IGCEP 2021-30 Indicative Generation Capacity Expansion Plan 2021-30 IPCC Inter-governmental Panel on Climate Change IPP Independent Power Producer IPPU Industrial Processes and Product Use LDN Land Degradation Neutrality LULUCF Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry MEPS Minimum Energy Performance Standards MoCC Ministry of Climate Change PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 7 MoNFSR Ministry of National Food Security & Research MoNHSR&C Ministry of National Health Services, Regulations and Coordination MOPD&SI Ministry of Planning, Development & Special Initiatives MoWR Ministry of Water Resources MRV Monitoring, Reporting and Verification MT CO!e Million Tonnes of Carbon dioxide Equivalent MTOE Million Tonnes of Oil Equivalent NAMAs Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions NAP National Adaptation Plan NAP-SCP National Action Plan on Sustainable Consumption and Production NARC National Agricultural Research Centre NBSAP National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan NCCP National Climate Change Policy NCEC National Committee on the Establishment of Carbon Markets NCSW National Commission on the Status of Women NDC Nationally Determined Contribution NDMA National Disaster Management Authority NEECA National Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority NEP 2021 National Electricity Policy 2021 NEPRA National Electric Power Regulatory Authority NEVP 2019 National Electric Vehicles Policy 2019 NFPP-IV National Flood Protection Plan  IV NIT National Investment Trust NIU NDC Implementation Unit NMHVRA National Multi-Hazard Vulnerability and Risk Assessment NPB Nature Performance Bonds NRSP National Rural Support Programme NSC National Steering Committee NTDC National Transmission and Dispatch Company NWP 2018 National Water Policy 2018 PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 20218 P&DDs Planning & Development Departments PAEC Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission PAI Protected Areas Initiative PASS Poverty Alleviation and Social Safety Net Division PDMA Provincial Disaster Management Authority PMCCC Prime Ministers Committee on Climate Change PMD Pakistan Metrological Department POPs Persistent Organic Pollutants PPIB Private Power and Infrastructure Board PPPA Public Private Partnership Authority Provincial DoA Provincial Department of Agriculture PSDP Public Sector Development Programme PSLEP Pakistan Snow Leopard and Ecosystem Protection Program REDD+PES The United Nations Programme on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation; Payments for Environmental Services RLNG Re-Gasified Liquefied Natural Gas R-PP Readiness Preparation Proposal SBN Sustainable Banking Network SDG Sustainable Development Goal SECP Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan SEIAs Social Environmental Impact Assessments SFF Sustainable Finance Framework SFM Sustainable Forest Management SLMP Sustainable Land Management Project SMEs Small and medium-sized enterprises SOPs Standard operating procedures TBTTP Ten Billion Tree Tsunami Programme PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 9 TNA Technology Need Assessment TOE Tonnes of Oil Equivalent UNCCD United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification UNDP United Nations Development Programme UNEP United Nations Environmental Programme UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change VNR Voluntary National Review VRE Variable Renewable Energy WAPDA Water and Power Development Authority WASH Water, Sanitation and Hygiene WIM Warsaw International Mechanism PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202110 Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) has performed its role to support the global efforts in combating climate change. GoP takes ownership and pride in submitting an updated Nationally Determined Contributions NDC which is inclusive and represents national consensus to accelerating the transition towards a climate-resilient economy.

The current submission showcases GoPs progress in climate action that ranges from policy and programs on Nature-based Solutions (NbS) to technology-based interventions. Pakistan, recognizing the role of nature in climate adaptation and mitigation, has developed robust natural capital restoration efforts including the Ten Billion Tree Tsunami Programme (TBTTP), Protected Areas Initiative (PAI) etc. These programs have also served as a way to enhance livelihood opportunities for the most vulnerable, including women and youth. In addition, Pakistan has introduced a number of policy actions focused on mitigating greenhouse gas emissions from high emission sectors like energy and industry.

The focus of GoPs climate actions during the decade ahead is decided by the current climate-induced vulnerabilities, aimed at achieving reduced poverty and ensuring a stable economy. The current submission is informed by recent policy development in the country in the NDC sectors, and some ambitious decisions taken by the pro-climate leadership to enhance Pakistans resilience and decarbonize the economy. In additionfor enhanced contributionsnew sectors and new gases have also been added to the updated document. Hence, Pakistan intends to set a cumulative ambitious conditional target of overall 50% reduction of its projected emissions by 2030, with 15% from the countrys own resources and for energy transition.

489.87 MtCO!e; Billion Trees Afforestation Project (BTAP) and TBTTP will sequester CO! around 500 Mt CO!e by 2040, if implemented fully. Pakistan requires to strengthen its scientific and technical capacities to reach the set transition targets.

Pakistan has already identified market and non-market-based approaches to help diversify the funding sources, including Nature Performance Bonds, Green/Blue Bonds, Carbon Pricing its climate ambition across sectors and the development of NbS that address its mitigation and adaptation potential.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202112 are impacted, with the poorest and those less equipped to withstand climate shocks and stresses essentially those who did the least to cause the crisis bearing the brunt. Low- income countries suffer more than developed countries where there are insufficient resources to tackle climate change. Pakistan, although only contributing 0.9% to global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, is one of the most vulnerable countries to the impacts of climate change. melting Himalayan glaciers, increasing cases of vector-borne diseases such as dengue, and an overall increase in the frequency and intensity of climate-induced natural disasters. Climate Change imposes numerous challenges, and is becoming an existential threat globally. Pakistans experience through Nature-based Solutions (NbS) in addressing the global challenges serves change beyond Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), and took initiatives which contributed to reduction of 8.7% emissions between 2016-2018.

In view of the above, the central goal of the updated NDCs is to realize the vision of a sustainable, low carbon, and climate-resilient Pakistan. The Government of Pakistan (GoP) aims to work towards the full implementation of NDC contributions considering the current circumstances, and realizing the importance of socio-economic conditions in designing climate action. Pakistan aims to advance the following specific objectives:

1. Improve NDC planning, policy, strategy, and legislation 2. Strengthen an enabling environment for NDC implementation 3. Accelerate the policy coherence and integration to achieve the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in the light of its Sustainable Development Report 2020 PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 13 4. Enhance NDC measurement, reporting and verification, and transparency of climate action GUIDING PRINCIPLES: 1. NbS green livelihood opportunities 2. Improve cross-referencing to climate change in national and provincial policies and action plans on climate adaptation and mitigation 3. Climate-informed preparatory and approval systems dealing with the life-cycle of projects 4. Foster the development of appropriate economic incentives to encourage public and 5. Explore the market and non-market based approaches in diversifying the funding sources for commissioning capital intensive projects 6. Promote opportunities for youth groups to engage in, and benefit from, Pakistans adaptation and mitigation objectives and targets 7. Gender-sensitive programming The GoP presents this updated NDC as obligatory under the Paris Agreement to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). This Updated NDC represents a consensus of our national aspirations and ambitions, constraints and barriers, as well the multi-sectoral directions of our climate actions, during the decade ahead.

Pakistans national vision for climate change is aligned with national development plans and sectoral priorities. This updated NDC is anchored on National Climate Change Policy (NCCP), and the Framework for its implementation. This document reflects upon Pakistans acute vulnerability with a leading role in climate change-related actions and programs in pursuance of the Paris Agreement.

The GoP has undertaken several policy measures since 2016 when the NDC was first submitted. The articulation and progress on ecosystem-based approaches, low carbon development, presented in the NDC. To further support ambitions, the GoP has adopted a NbS, approach along with green jobs and other chains of initiatives with its limited national resources. equivalent (Mt CO!e.) for 2030 as communicated in Pakistans initial NDC submission in 2016. However, realizing reducing the GHG emissions under the Paris Agreement to limit the temperatures between 1.5 - 2C, the GoP remains committed to reduce the emissions to the maximum possible extent. The GoP has taken a series of transformative initiatives.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202114 Hence, Pakistan intends to set a cumulative ambitious aim of conditional and voluntary contributions of overall 50% reduction of its projected emissions by 2030, with a 15% drop below business as usual (BAU) from the countrys own resources, and an additional 35% drop below BAU subject to international financial support.

Fg.1.1: Voluntary and Conditional Reduction of 50% below its projected BAU emissions by 2030 sectoral initiatives which are conditional to the availability of international financial and technical resources:

MITIGATION:

1. RENEWABLE ENERGY: By 2030, 60 % of all energy produced in the country will be generated from renewable energy resources including hydropower.

2. TRANSPORTATION: By 2030, 30 % of all new vehicles sold in Pakistan in various categories will be Electric Vehicles (EVs).

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 15 3. COAL: From 2020, new coal power plants are subject to a moratorium, and no generation of power through imported coal shall be allowed, shelving plans for two new coal fired power plants in favor of hydro- electric power and focusing on coal gasification and liquefaction for indigenous coal.

4. LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY: 2016 onwards, continued investments in NbS through the largest ever afforestation program in the history of the countrythe Ten Billion Tree Tsunami Programme (TBTTP)will sequester 148.76 MtCO!e emissions over the next 10 years. The estimated project cost of about US$800 million is being met nationally from indigenous resources as an unconditional contribution. Tsunami Programme (TBTTP)will sequester 148.76 MtCO!e emissions over the next 10 years.

The estimated project cost of about $800 million is being met nationally from indigenous resources as an unconditional contribution.

Priority actions will result in an estimated saving of around 1.7 MtCO!e (emissions from coal power plant are 8.8 MtCO!e) on account of two shelved coal power plants, 24 Mt CO!e on account of the introduction of EVs, and 22 MtCO!e on account of stabilizing energy mix 40- 60 in favor of renewable energy2. Pakistans emissions as per 2018 are 489.87 MtCO!e, and the Billion Tree Afforestation Program (BTAP) and TBTTP will sequester CO! of around 500 Mt CO!e by 2040, if implemented fully.

ADAPTATION:

5. RECHARGE PAKISTAN: By 2030, the project envisages the reduction of flood risk and enhanced water recharge at six sites in the Indus Basin, building resilience of 10 million people, as well as strengthening vulnerable ecosystems. The project is under review by Green Climate Fund (GCF) for funding. In the meantime, Pakistan has allocated PKR 6 billion from national resources to commence the activities in three sites, namely Manchar & Hamal wetland, Taunsa pond area, and Dera Ismail Khan.

6. PROTECTED AREAS: By 2023, total protected areas in the country will be enhanced from 12% to 15% that will result in preserving rare fauna / flora, green job opportunities for 5,500 people, and promoting eco- tourism.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202116 adaptive capacity include formulation of National Adaptation Plan (NAP), and creation of Green Jobs.

MITIGATION:

I. ADDITIONAL: More than 12 GW under construction requiring about II. HYDROPOWER: For rapid expansion of RE including hydropower, reaching 60%3 production by 2030 would require an estimated investment of US$50 Billion by 2030 and $80 Billion by 2040 (IGCEP III. TRANSMISSION: An estimated US$20 billion is required to upgrade the transmission network by 2040.This will escalate in a case with large share of variable power from solar and wind. (JICA study) IV. COAL: Buying out the relatively new coal power projects, including the local Thar coalmines4, would have an upfront estimated cost of US$18 billion. An additional estimated US$13 billion will be required to replace the production of the coal power plants with solar (World billion by 2040, on account of completing the in-progress RE projects, additional hydropower, transmission, and phasing out of coal and replacing with hydropower. Pakistan will require Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and Articles 9, 10 and 11 of the Paris PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 17 Agreement to fully implement the climate actions contained in these NDCs. Paragraph 5 of Article 4 of the Paris Agreement specifically committed that support shall be provided to 9, 10 and 11, recognizing that enhanced support for developing country Parties will allow for higher ambition in their actions.

World Bank endorses Pakistans climate vision 2021, lending data showing Pakistan is leading the world on Climate Action; a massive 44% of its main stream development funding now climate compatible through on-ground initiatives like the TBTTP, Clean Energy, and Protected Areas Initiative (PAI).

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202118 GHG emissions to the pre-industrial levels. Under the Paris Agreement, each country must warming, and is required to communicate contributions as NDCs. Pakistan submitted its NDC to UNFCCC in November 2016, in recognition of its responsibility to the comity of nations. Pakistans first NDC intended to reduce up to 20% of its 2030 projected GHG emissions, subject to the availability of international grants to meet the total abatement cost of about US$40 billion for mitigation and US$714 billion for adaptation per annum at current prices. For the updated NDCs, Pakistan is aiming to highlight the nationally implemented initiatives since 2016, institutional arrangements, and governance approaches that were adopted for enhanced contributions. The revised NDCs follow a whole-of-government approach to revising, reviewing, and reporting on climate action.

C. This NDC revision is guided by three driving principles:

1. High Ambition: To undertake initiatives from our limited national resources to support global drive to stabilize global temperatures, while enhancing resilience and adaptation capacity of our people;

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 19 3. Inclusion: For institutional arrangements and governance necessary for climate actions by adopting whole-of-government approach.

A National Steering Committee (NSC) chaired by Special Assistant to the Prime Minister on Climate Change guided the revision process that was spread over almost one year. The technical work was led by two committees - Mitigation Working Group led by Ministry of Energy and chaired by National Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority (NEECA), and Adaptation Working Group led by Ministry of Water Resources and chaired by Federal Flood Commission, supported by 15 sectoral working groups comprising of federal and provincial Center (GCISC) served as the Pak-NDC Secretariat.

This NDC, therefore, reflects a consensus of our national aspirations and ambitions, barriers ahead. The institutional arrangement defined during the revision process would continue, leading up to the review and revision of Pak-NDC and its implementation during the period processes.

1. Strengthen existing GHG emission reduction targets or adding new GHG targets; 2. Enhance sectoral non-GHG targets or adding new sectoral non-GHG targets; and 3. Augment existing policies and actions or adding new policies and actions. the GoPs long-term policy of reducing the countrys climate vulnerability and accelerating economic growth by following a pro-active renewable energy policy and decarbonization pathways.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202120 roadmap has a framework identifying and prioritizing needs, highlighting gaps, and proposing in the form of a results-based framework designed to plan, coordinate, monitor, and mobilize support for the implementation of 11 projects in agriculture and water and eight forestry sector projects, prioritized by the GoP.

With GHG emissions of 405 MtCO!e in 2015, Pakistan only ranked 19th in terms of global future ranking cannot be projected given the changes in carbon emission expected to occur during this period.

Pakistans NDC in 2016 projected a 300% growth in GHG emissions for the period 2015-2030, based on projected 9% Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth and increased reliance on fossil fuels. These estimates have now been revised downwards largely due to TBTTP (2016- 2021) sequestration of 8.4 MtCO!eq., together with increased contribution to RE and energy efficiency, Covid-19 and economic growth rate, all contributing towards the reduction of 8.7% emissions between 2016 and 2021.

NDC submitted in 2016. These emissions were calculated based on the GDP growth of over 9%, economic impacts of China Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC), and sectoral growth rates. Consideration for economic and industrial parameters, as well as the governments growth targets, social and economic infrastructure and the development goals were considered. Estimated energy demand and meeting the energy needs were given utmost importance. A contribution of reducing 20% of the projected emissions was subject to provision of international financial support of US$40 billion.

In the context of implementing the mitigation targets outlined in the NDC, several barriers will need to be removed. Pakistan has carried a gap analysis by reviewing the implementation of the first NDC submitted in 2016. A sectoral survey was also conducted to evaluate key PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 21 elements of success and challenges in respective sectors. Several recurring themes were and capacity building support, in addition to mainstreaming, reforms, and institutional strengthening. Pakistan places emphasis on these factors and they need to be given utmost importance for successful NDC implementation.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202122 by Germanwatch as the 8th most affected country in the world over the period 20002019.

Pakistans vulnerability to climate change and climate-induced extreme events, and its consistent appearance in the top 10 ranking of Global Climate Risk Index by Germanwatch has recurrently affected by catastrophes both in the long-term index as well as in the index for the respective year. ND-Gain Index5 has placed Pakistan as the 39th most vulnerable country borne out of the fact that in Fiscal Year (FY) 2020, 40% of households suffered from moderate to severe food insecurity6 and therefore cannot absorb further climate shocks to food systems. While the extreme weather events often cause crop failures threatening food security, the increased temperatures, and variations in precipitation and monsoon patterns coupled with increased carbon, are resulting in decreased protein, zinc, iron, and quality of protein in crops.

This results in decreased dietary protein causing malnutrition and stunting. The country is increasingly exposed and vulnerable to various natural hazards, particularly floods, tropical cyclones, droughts, landslides, Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) and earthquakes. More than 30 million people have been affected since 2010. The three sectors of the economy that are most at risk include the agriculture-food-water nexus, urban infrastructure, and the financial sector coupled with the government budget. In terms of human costs, the poor are groundwater that is heavily degraded, and are the most directly impacted by natural disasters and slow onset of climate change.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 23 CLIMATE CHALLENGE POSES FOLLOWING TWO CONCURRENT CHALLENGES TO PAKISTAN:

Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 6th Assessment Report. In upper Indus Basin, the CIDs are manifested in reduced snowfall and snowfall periods and and Sindh, the CIDs are observed in increased frequency and severity of tropical storms, coastal rains, and seawater intrusion. In the planes of Punjab and Sindh, CIDs manifest in extended and frequent riverine floods, heatwaves relevant to agriculture and health, coupled with increased aridity in arid and semi-arid regions of Balochistan, Sindh, and parts of Punjab. This is expected to accelerate as the temperatures cross the 1.5C threshold. The degrading ecosystems have been costly for human health, adversely impacted water-agriculture, and the reduced productivity of ecosystems. These elements are important to understand the countrys climate vulnerability and its long-term threats and contextualize adaptation and mitigation needs and measures. Finally, these gradual decadal processes are rapidly settling in, and in effect also cause sudden and abrupt extreme events, incurring immediate as well as long-term Loss and Damage (L&D).

Given high diversity of ecosystems in the country, compound extreme weather events, or a combination of their drivers and hazards are contributing to societal and environmental risks. Concurrent extreme events at multiple locations have become more frequent including in high latitude mountain areas of Karakoram, Hindukush, and Himalayas mountain ranges, as well as food producing agricultural areas. Communities and local populations have long observed and the scientists. Most frequent compound extreme events are heatwaves and droughts in parts of Balochistan and Sindh. Summer temperatures in the city of Jacobabad in Pakistans Sindh PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202124 province have been recorded at 52C . Biologically, humans cannot withstand heat beyond the threshold of 52C. In fact, the Indus Valley is the number one spot worldwide in the context of climate change7. With increasing temperatures and frequent dry spells, compound extreme events are characterized by torrential rains, flash floods and landslides.

While the precipitation has increased at an average rate of 0.08 inches per decade since 1901 worldwide, in Pakistan some dry areas have become drier as they have experienced less than normal precipitation. Further, many extreme temperature conditions are becoming more common since the 1970s: hot summer days and hot summer nights, the latter at an even faster rate than the former, indicating less respite or cooling off at night. Both mean and maximum summer temperatures increased in all parts of the country between 1951 and 2000, while summer temperatures dropped in all parts of the country, receiving monsoon rains in all provinces except in Balochistan. Record-setting daily high temperatures have become more common than record lows. The two decades since 2000 had twice as many record highs as record lows. Generally, a stronger warming trend in the winter is observed as opposed to the summer, with winter growing shorter and summer growing longer. The minimum temperature continue to increase in geographic regions like Sindh, Gilgit Baltistan (GB) among other areas, and have begun to have implications for the future of the countrys food security. The is expected that both the temperature and precipitation will continue to grow through the 2050s.

In response to the need to build resilience, the GoP has accordingly undertaken and planned several key actions, as recorded below in chapter 4 and 5.

In addition to the factors stated above, there are significant socio-economic dimensions and economic costs of climate change:

Demographically, Pakistan is a young country, with a projected population of young people reaching 181 million by 2050 with an estimated four million entering the working age every year. This poses significant challenges. Nearly 29.5% of the total population is living below 7 The first recording was made in July 1987, then in June 2005, followed by a rise in June 2010 and July 2012. The ultra- heat had only persisted for a few hours, with the three-day average temperature under wet bulb measurement for the summer months of 2010 and 2012 at 34 degrees Celsius.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 25 the poverty line, and unemployment is reported to be 4.7%. The situation worsened with the advent of the Covid-19 pandemic. The Ministry of Planning Development & Special Initiatives (MOPD&SI) estimated that 12.3 million (20% of employed labor force) to 18.5 million people (30% of the labor force) was rendered unemployed due to the pandemic.

At an average economic growth rate of 4.8% from 1952 to 2020, current GDP stands at nearly US$ 284 billion. This classifies Pakistan as a lower middle-income country. The State Bank of revised Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) submission has been prepared cognizant of the current socio-economic challenges posed by the Covid-19 pandemic, and highlights the countrys contribution for green economic recovery.

2050. This estimated that 70% of this amount was primarily due to infrastructural costs. Sectoral studies still need to be undertaken to accurately estimate increased costs of development, infrastructure upgradation based on resilience frameworks and building codes, or reduction in crop yields and agricultural productivity. The comprehensive specialized economic analysis of adaptation costs of climate change-induced extreme events based on any projected increase in the frequency of extreme climate events under various temperature increase scenarios and trajectories still need to be undertaken.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202126 growth and development pathways. As highlighted in the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) submitted in 2016, Pakistans top priority remains social development and poverty eradication. We recognize that large-scale investments in high emission sectors can also provide additional opportunities for mitigation potential. However, constraints in technology transfer and climate financing mechanisms have remained barriers.

Pakistan has surpassed mitigation contributions and has taken climate change beyond NDCs, and taken initiatives that have contributed to reduction of 8.7% emissions between 2016-2018. 201920, the country is facing demand-supply gap of 3000 Mega Watt (MW) that can best be fulfilled by improving energy-mix. For the demand side management, the Government of Pakistan (GoP) has approved National Electric Vehicles Policy 2020-25 (NEVP 2019) stipulating a target of 30% and 90% share in sale of passenger vehicles and heavy-duty trucks by 2030 and 2040. Also, National Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority (NEECA) is developing Minimum Energy Performance Standards (MEPS) for electric motors, air conditioners, and LED lights. NEECAs Draft Strategic Plan (2020-2023) will reduce 3 Million Tonnes of Oil Equivalent (MTOE) from the countrys primary energy supply contributing to 6.4 MtCO!e carbon emissions reduction. More importantly, however, the GoP endeavors to meet the demand with the Indicative Generation Capacity Expansion Plan (IGCEP 2021- 30), National Electricity Policy (NEP) 2021, and Alternative and Renewable Energy Policy (ARE 2019), included together with hydropower, to prioritize transition to demand side management.

ii. Engaging Private Sector: The GoP has engaged the private sector for energy supply. For PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 27 example, a Result Based Financing (RBF) pilot project in Sindh and Punjab was initiated in 2019 in order to encourage private sector investment for off-grid solution based on the International Finance Corporations (IFC) global standard products in off-grid communities. A four-year campaign has been launched to encourage private sector investment towards the lighting needs of consumers in the remote areas, including the addition of 1200 MW of wind.

2018 led to increase in cement manufacturing and pushed cement production forecast to grow 10-15% annually over the next decade. This is an additional production of estimated 15-25 Million Tonnes (MT)/year by 2030. The share of power generation from coal was 24% in FY21 and is expected to increase to 31% by FY 25 due to committed plants, but will then decrease to 20.1% by FY30. The estimates are that the increase in coal consumption by mining in Thar region of Sindh Province.

iv. Energy Mix Projections: Pakistan has an estimated hydropower potential of around 60,000 MW, out of which approximately 14% is currently exploited. Pakistan has an average theoretical solar photovoltaic (solar PV) potential of 5.341kWh/m$Global Horizontal province. If this potential is utilized, all of Pakistans current energy needs can be met with solar power alone. Pakistan also has a significant untapped potential for wind power generation, mainly in the coastal areas of Sindh and Balochistan. The share of renewables in recent years has increased significantly from 0.25% in 2015 to 5% in 20198, and the potential for several-fold growth is tremendous.

There is a strong business case for meeting targets set in the Alternative and Renewable Energy Policy (ARE) 2019 for RE growth. The ARE 2019 mandates 30% solar, bagasse and wind by 2030. Yet, the most recent Indicative Generation Capacity Expansion Plan stipulates that the energy mix should have 65% RE (hydropower, solar, wind and bagasse) by 2030, reversing the large dependence on imported fossil fuel. Given the system constraints, solar and wind will only begin to accelerate after 2030 in Pakistan. The new NEP 2021 includes principles of competitive bidding, environmentally responsible expanded generation through RE and more efficient use of generation.

Against this backdrop, achieving the least cost electricity mix in Pakistan would require an PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202128 ambitious expansion of RE, reaching proposed production levels by 2030 in the base case scenario (4.02% peak demand growth). Hydropower development in Pakistan is critical for the number of projects are focused on clean hydropower, where more than 12 GW are under construction. In theory, an even higher variable renewable energy share is possible, allowing proposed energy mix will require investments in the grid, changes to operational procedures, and proper planning of Variable Renewable Energy (VRE) expansion with storage facilities.

i. Policy Environment: Recognizing that the energy sector plays a critical role in achieving mitigation targets, the policies that guide Pakistans initiatives include NEP 2021, Energy Efficiency & Conservation Strategic Plan by NEECA, ARE 2019, NEVP 2019, and IGCEP 2021-2030. These policies are coordinated and steered by regulators and specialized agencies including National Electric Power Regulatory Authority (NEPRA), Private Power & Infrastructure Board (PPIB), Alternative Energy Development Board (AEDB), Central Power Purchasing Agency Guarantees (CPPA-G), National Transmission & Dispatch Company (NTDC), Water & Power Development Authority (WAPDA), and Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission (PAEC). There are specialized agencies at the provincial level dealing with hydro and coal generation and transmission issues.

ii. Wind Power Projects: About 18 wind power projects of 926.76MW capacity were completed. Twelve wind power projects with a cumulative capacity of 610 MW achieved financial closing in November 2019 .

iii. Bagasse energy: Eight bagasse cogeneration projects of 259.1 MW capacity were completed.

iv. Solar Power Projects: Five solar projects are operational with installed capacity of 330 MW; four projects by Independent Power Producers (IPPs) with 41.80 MW capacity are expecting financial closure.

v. Hydropower: Small hydro are contributing 128 MW, while 877 MW are under implementation and 1500 MW are available for development. Medium to large hydro project of 9,827 MW are installed.

vi. Net-Metering: More than 2,300 new licenses were issued by NEPRA during July 2019-March 2020 under its Net Metering Regulations (2015); poised to grow at an accelerated pace, as of March 2020, more than 4,125 solar installations with PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 29 cumulative capacity exceeding 75 MW were approved9. vii. International Finance Corporation (IFC) Lighting Pakistan: A four-year campaign to encourage private sector investment towards the lighting needs of consumers in the remote villages in Pakistan. The program introduced IFC global standard products in off-grid villages.

viii. Off-Grid Electrification Pilot Project: The AEDB undertook a RBF pilot project in Sindh and Punjab to encourage private sector investment for off-grid solar solutions in remote villages. The IFC program was completed in 2019 with 7.5 million people served in Sindh, Punjab and GB. The Internationale Zusammenarbeit (German International Development Agency  GIZ) undertook a small-scale RBF project serving limited number of villages in Punjab and Sind. Based on the initial success, Sindh has started a partial RBF program for electrifying 200,000 households. This project is expected to lead to a full-fledged program in 2021. The microgrids are being considered for electrification of remote communities. NEPRA will notify enabling regulations for these.

x. National Electric Vehicles: Policy for two and three wheelers as well as heavy vehicles will target a 30% shift in sale of EVs by 2030. Pakistan follows the European (Euro) emissions standards, and while the recent switch to Euro 5 still has a limited share of the market, it is expected to have long-term benefits in terms of urban air quality and lowering vehicular emissions from combustion.

Lahore, Peshawar, and Multan, while a bus rapid transit zero emission metro-line was initiated in 2018 for the city of Karachi. Presently under implementation, the project which will also turn cow-dung to methane as a fuel for the metro-line is under implementation. The 30 km metroline would be the worlds first bio- methane hybrid bus fleet where 100% of the fuel demand would be met by biogas. The project will last for an estimated 20 years piloting emission free public transport services. A 40 km Karachi Circular Railway is under development to provide mass transportation while reducing emissions in the city.

9 Net-metering rules allow DISCOs to balance the units consumed by consumer, from the grid, against the excess unit sold to them. With more than 2,300 new licenses issued during July 2019-March 2020, these installations stand at cumulative installed capacity of 47.6 MW in 2019. This contribution thus far accounts for only 0.12% of total energy mix. As of May 2021, there were 11121 commissioned systems.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202130 by Pakistan can be summarized in the following table: Table: 4.1: Mitigation Policy Action in Six Sectors GHG Emission Policy Initiatives Plans and Targets Biggest source of GHG emissions in Pakistan with NEECA Draft Strategic Plan (2020-2023) Sectoral actions account for 6.4 MtCO!e emissions reduction by 2030 Major energy demand sector contributing to GHG emissions of NEVP 2019 for two and three wheelers as well as heavy vehicles Switch to Euro 5 (in process) Goal is to lower vehicular emissions from combustion and improving urban air quality Second highest emitting sector with 198.59 MT Complete ban on open burning of rice stubble, solid waste and other hazardous materials Disposal of crop residue in an environmentally friendly manner Climate Change Policy Azad Jammu & Kashmir AJ&K (2017) Climate Change Action Plan (20192030) Third largest emitting sector which releases Pakistans National Action Plan on Sustainable Development Goal-12 (SDG-12) (2017) PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 31 Fourth GHG emitting sector calculated to be National Forest Policy (2018) Land Degradation Neutrality (LDN) Identify policy priorities for protecting soil quality for nutrition and micronutrients and piloting approaches on LDN in various ecosystems.

Ranked lowest emitting sector in Pakistan that contributes 19.2 MT CO! eq.

Clean Green Pakistan Index (CGPI2019) Banning of single-use plastics Encourage turning animal waste (cow-dung) to methane for use as fuel for rural household and urban transportation projects as in Karachi BRT.

Promote reuse and source reduction of waste following overarching sectoral considerations need to be adequately addressed 1. Energy Demand: While Pakistans supply and demand gap has considerably narrowed since and generation capacity influences the future investment and licensing of hydropower projects. Off-grid and RE resources have emerged as the least cost preferred option to overcome the energy access challenge.

2. Carbon Lock-in: Several coal power plants have become operational since 2016, including the 1,320 MW Sahiwal Coal Power Project. The share of coal power in Pakistans energy mix is small, and as under-construction hydropower projects become operational this ratio will further improve.

10 In 2018, the Fuels sector grew by approximately 52,000 jobs, or nearly 5% for a total of 1,122,764 jobs. Oil and natural gas employers added the most new jobs, nearly 51,000, employing 603,000 and 271,000 respectively.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202132 io n.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 33 es :

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202134 PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 35 PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202136 te s.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 37 PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202138 and strengthen the resilience of the economy. National Climate Change Policy (NCCP) has adopted an integrated approach to build resilience in various climate sensitive sectors, and to ensure a comprehensive response at both national and sub-national levels. Pakistan will continue to strive to make considerable progress in various sectors as per the following approach:

5.1 POLICY INITIATIVES Agriculture is the backbone of Pakistans economy, providing livelihoods and food security.

Unfortunately, this sector is also the most impacted from climate variabilities as seen in the section on Climate Impact Drivers (CIDs) and compound extreme weather events. The crop yields over recent years have adversely been affected by changing climate patterns and decades, with water demand projected to rise significantly with rising population and warmer temperatures. Agriculture sector is also the largest consumer of freshwater, accounting for water consumption and low value crops such as rice and sugarcane. It is estimated that the and agriculture productivity.

The development of a National Adaptation Plan (NAP) has commenced as was envisioned during near-term (2020-2025) targets of Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) 2016, in order to create a framework for guiding the mainstreaming of medium and long-term climate change concerns into national sectoral policies, strategies and programs for coordinated approach between different tiers of government. The NAP aims to bestow trust in natures ability to PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 39 recoup and regenerate itself by investing in ecosystems as a means of forced adaptation measure. The GCF support through United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) for the development of NAP will help achieve the objectives through:

i. Strengthening the capacity to coordinate and promote climate change adaptation (CCA) at systemic, institutional and individual levels, and help poor and climate vulnerable communities to adapt to climate change impact;

ii. Integrating CCA into policies, strategies, legislation, regulations, and programs; iii. Strengthening of a system to generate and share knowledge, experience, and lessons learned at national and sub-national levels to advance CCA; and iv. Development of a strategy to implement, monitor, and communicate adaptation benefits at different levels, and scale up government efforts in adaptation efforts, and process of regularly updating NAP.

The Government of Pakistan (GoP) has, therefore, prioritized three environmental areas for priority actions: Nature-based Solutions (NbS), Land Use Change & Forestry, and Community Infrastructure. These interventions are aligned with NCCP and NDC 2016, and indicate centrality of adaptation and resilience. Accumulatively, these interventions will enhance the adaptive capacity and resilience while giving several socio-economic, health and mitigation co-benefits.

5.2 ADAPTATION ACTIONS 1) Nature-based Solutions i. Eco-system Restoration Initiative (2019-2030): Mainstream adaptation and mitigation through ecologically targeted initiatives for afforestation, biodiversity conservation/ecosystem rehabilitation, and policy development by restoring 30% of degraded forest, 5% of degraded cropland, 6% of degraded grassland (rangeland) and 10% of degraded wetlands by 2030. Further, setting up a transparent Eco-system Restoration Fund (ESRF) to finance the initiatives under the Ecosystem Restoration Initiative (ESRI).

ii. Protected Areas Initiative (2020-23): Expanding the coverage of protected areas from 12 to 15% of the total land area by 2023, at an estimated cost of Rs. 3.9 PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202140 billion, by notifying 15 new national parks covering a land area of over 7,300 square kilometers. The government will implement ecological management plans and governance through community-led conservation funds. forests in Sindh and Balochistan, and raising new plantations of mangroves over an area of 16,552 ha for climate mitigation, biodiversity conservation, and strengthening local livelihoods of fisheries and eco-tourism.

iv. Miyawaki Forests (2019-ongoing): Small urban forests, as pilot projects, in several cities for mitigating urban heat island effect through native tree species that grow faster, sequester more carbon and are self-sustaining. Presently, 126 urban forest projects using the Miyawaki technique are being implemented across the country, with 51 in Lahore, 50 in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, 20 in Islamabad and five in Karachi.

v. Recharge Pakistan (2019-in pipeline): Building resilience to climate change through Ecosystem-based Adaptation for Integrated Flood Risk Management by identifying flood vulnerable areas where adaptation strategies could be most effective. The project aims to utilize floodwater for restoring wetland ecosystem and recharging its aquifer. The project would possibly impact around 10 million vulnerable people through reduced flood risks, increased water security, improved agricultural productivity and food security, community-based disaster risk management (CBDRM), and climate-resilient livelihood options. The project objectives require an investment of US$150 million (US$50 million requested from Green Climate Fund) in deployment of climate resilient infrastructure.

vi. Ten Billion Tree Tsunami Programme: This four-year flagship national program (2019-2023) will increase the existing forest area. During phase one, 3.29 billion plants will be planted and/or regenerated to restore nine different forest categories over an area of 1.2 million hectares by 2023. During phase two, 750 to 850 million plants/ year will continue over the next six years up to 2030. This initiative builds upon the success story of the Billion Trees Afforestation Project (BTAP) that was implemented in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) province during 2015-2020, whereby 1.2 billion trees were planted/ regenerated during 2014 2018 period at cost of Rs 14 billion. An investment of approximately US$125 million was directed towards the project from provincial resources. This project increased KPs forest area from 20.3% to 26.6%. It is expected to result in total carbon sequestration of 0.04 GtCO!e. United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), United National Environment Programme (UNEP), UN Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD), the Bonn Challenge, and other international organizations such as the World Economic Forum acclaimed the ambitious project. For Pakistan, it has made way for Bonn Challenge II.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 41 information and utilize state of the art technology to build the countrys capacity to adapt to climate challenges in agriculture and water sectors. The project envisages enhancing farmers resilience to climate through skill and capacity development.

2) Land Use Change and Forestry i. Sustainable Land Management Project (SLMP Phase II, 2015-21): Rehabilitated approximately 10,000 acres of land, 5000 acres of plantations, and 15,000 acres of land receding. For FY 2020-21, 800 acres of plantation, 4500 rangeland rehabilitation, 30 gated structures, and 5000 acres rangeland receding have been planned.

ii. Sustainable Forest Management (SFM, 2016-21): Regeneration and management of seven forest landscapes spreading over 145,300 hectares; temperate coniferous forests in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, dry scrub forests in Punjab, and riverine forests in Punjab and Sindh.

iii. National Forest Policy (2018): For strengthening the long-term objectives related to forestry sector, the policy has a three-pronged approach: a) conserve existing forests, b) increase tree cover through community participation, and c) meet international obligations related to forests. By 2030, Pakistan plans to increase forest area from 5.4% to 6.5%.

iv. REDD+ Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP, 2015-2021): Extended by Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) in 2018 to further support the preparedness activities in Pakistan. Forest Reference Emission Level or FREL of Pakistan was submitted to the UNFCCC and the National REDD+ Strategy is presently being finalized.

v. National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP, 2018): To conserve forest biodiversity and its sustainable use by providing an enabling institutional and policy environment, protection and restoration of forest ecosystem services, increasing indigenous floral diversity; improving knowledge base by adopting scientific research and modern technologies relating to forest biodiversity, and reform the rights and concessions of local people.

vi. REDD+ Indus delta (2019-2030 Delta Blue Carbon Phase I): Restoring 350,000 ha in the Districts of Thatta and Sujawal in Sindh province through plantation in 60 years via a multi-phase public private partnership. Phase 1 aims at restoration of 224,997 ha of degraded land through large scale reforestation of which 75,000 ha was restored by 2020 with mangrove plantations.

vii. Restoring mangrove forests (1990-ongoing): Under voluntary plantation drives, PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202142 Pakistan has annually increased at an annual growth rate of 3.74%, making Pakistan the only country in the region with an expanding mangrove cover. Over four million mangroves were planted under various partnerships, involving public and private sectors as well as Civil Society Organizations (CSOs). Under TBTTP, Sindh province has planned a plantation of 1.5 billion trees, mainly in mangrove areas. Preservation of mangrove forests will be used for carbon capture and to develop resilience against seawater intrusion and tropical storms. In Balochistan, 1,200 ha have been added over the years.

Statistics Authority to develop guidelines for Natural Capital Accounting system for Pakistan. In addition, Ministry of Climate Change (MoCC) in the recent development in partnership with the World Bank is formulating Natural Capital Account Roadmap that can provide detailed plan for better management of the economy. The outcome will help the government to design the evidence- based national forest policy and plans, improve institutional framework and help design and monitor strategies for implementing Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

3) Community Infrastructure i. Glacial Lake Outburst Flood II (2017-2022): Scaled up GLOF I from two districts to 10, and initiated the revision of two policies to include GLOF risk reduction, provide early warning signs to target communities for appropriate actions, scaling up monitoring systems, and deploying 250 small-scale engineering structures to reduce effect of GLOF on local livelihoods. This will help strengthen resilience of communities that are likely to be affected by GLOF.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 43 iii. Clean Green Pakistan Index (2019): Created a platform for strengthening municipal services, based on a composite index of five pillarswater, sanitation, hygiene, solid waste management, and plantation. Aimed at encouraging local governments and citizens to enhance cleanliness and hygiene in their respective cities and ensuring local representation and participation and knowledge- based practice among communities. Piloted in 12 cities of Punjab and seven cities of KP to compete in strengthening municipal service delivery by the local governments, and upscaled to 93 cities from all provinces in 20202021 in order to spark the publics interest in learning about effective waste management, self-hygiene, and the importance of forest cover.

v. Green Stimulus (2020): Providing short-term relief in the shape of green jobs creation and livelihood under TBTTP post Covid-19 economic downturn by employing 84,609 daily wagers towards achieving a total plantation of 430 million during 2020.

vi. Pakistan Hydromet & Climate services project (2018-24): Strengthening Pakistans public sector delivery of reliable and timely hydro-meteorological and disaster risk management services to enhance community risk to shock.

Finally, ESRF was launched to serve as a financial mechanism for mobilizing resources and to facilitate Government Pakistans climate compatible development policies. In pursuance of the foregoing, Pakistan will undertake the following policy actions:

Table 5.1: Strengthening Policies, Strategies and Action Plans Supporting Policy Actions Lead Agency Proposed Completion Climate Change Act established:

1. Pakistan Climate Change Council 2. Pakistan Climate Change Authority 3. Pakistan Climate Change Fund PMs Committee on Climate Change was established and met four times to discuss the issues of climate change.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202144 National Climate Change Gender Action Plan (ccGAP) Provinces prepare their provincial climate change policies/action plans/strategies MoCC in collaboration with provinces MoCC in collaboration with federal and Provincial Departments MoCC in collaboration with federal and provincial departments MoCC Federal Flood Commission (FFC), and NDMA MoCC in collaboration with NEECA and federal and provincial departments National Multi-Hazard Vulnerability and Risk Assessment (MHVRA) undertaken at district level NDMA and Provincial Disaster Management Authority (PDMA)s Climate change insurance products developed for marginalized communities MoCC, Poverty Alleviation and Social Safety Net Division (PASS)/EHSAAS PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 45 adaptation in various sectors, as provided in the table 5.2.

Table: 5.2: Key Adaptation Sectors & Supporting Actions Overview Supporting Actions Agriculture:  NWP 2018 recognizes the need of adaptive measures television etc.) to provide farmers weather updates and advisory services  Adoption of Climate Smart Agricultural practices for the production of a variety of plants Water management has emerged as a critical area for Pakistan Water:  NFPP-IV was approved in 2017 and NWP in 2018. NFPP- grassland and 10% of degraded wetlands, 5% of degraded cropland PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202146 Health Co-benefit:  Reinvestment of revenues in health. Revenues from  Adopt a Health in All Policies (HiAP) approach to energy policy  Establish mechanisms to facilitate collaboration between health and energy professionals Waste and WASH:  Operationalizing Pakistan Wash Strategic Planning & Coordination Cell established at MoCC to fast-track progress towards climate resilient WASH Air Pollution:  Revision of Pakistan Clean Air Program to enhance the PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 47 5.3 CONTRIBUTIONS TO ADAPTATION Table 5.3: Supporting Adaptation Actions & Indicators Objective Supporting Actions Lead Organization Indicators Promote climate smart inputs and management practices in agriculture Development of crop varieties and livestock breeds resistant to heat and water stresses National Agricultural Research Centre (NARC), DoAs Number of crop varieties developed, piloted and approved Develop sustainable soil fertility improvement practices Area of land with sustainable soil fertility improvement practices Ministry of National Food Security & Research (MoNFSR), NDMA, PDMA & DoAs Area of land with systemic protection from pests Improve irrigation and water management Demand management measures to increase water-use efficiency and productivity MoWR, Provincial P&DDs, DoIs Number of demand management measures developed and piloted MoWR, Provincial P&DDs, DoIs Number of small/ large reservoirs constructed or rehabilitated Introduction of water conservation technology and techniques in irrigated agriculture Number of water conservation technology and techniques piloted PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202148 Biodiversity and Other Vulnerable Ecosystems MoCC Number of wildlife corridors established Adoption of good practices of natural grassland management in livestock production Provincial livestock departments Area of land protected with sustainable grassland management practices Area of land restores/conserved under Protected Areas Initiative Prioritize the consideration of blue nature-based solutions (NbS).

MoCC Number of blue nature-based solutions piloted MoCC Length of coastal areas protected Mitigate impacts of extreme events through preparedness and capacity building.

Hydro- meteorological monitoring system developed Climate database established PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 49 Number of capacity development initiatives undertaken Number of cost-effective innovative disaster risk management solutions implemented Incorporate health and environment in climate and disaster risk reduction related policies and vice versa.

Enhance research regarding impacts of climate change on health Ministry of National Health Services, Regulations and Coordination. (MoNHSR&C) Number of research studies conducted Number of monitoring and forecasting systems developed PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202150 Number of multi-sectoral collaboration mechanisms operationalized MoCC Number of relevant studies undertaken Adoption of One Health mechanism MoCC One Health mechanism adopted Number of health adaptation programs implemented with support of GIS tools Develop standardize emergency procedures and stockpiling of essential medicines in advance Number of standardized emergency procedures developed Number of measures adopted to improve child mortality rate Adopt a Health in All Policies (HiAP) approach to energy policy MoNHSR&C HiAP approach to energy policy adopted PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 51 Number of relevant vulnerability assessment studies undertaken Adopt low cost, climate resilient technology available for infrastructure Number of low-cost climate resilient technologies piloted Explore opportunity for metered water supply on cost recovery basis Number of pilots rolled out for metered water supply PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202152 and adaptation realms. Ministry of Climate Change (MoCC), through a Gender Readiness Grant from the Green Climate Fund (GCF), is in the process of developing a Climate Change Gender Action Plan (ccGAP). The exercise, based on United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Changes (UNFCCC) Gender Action Plan, builds upon five pillars: i) capacity- building, knowledge-sharing and communication, ii) gender balance and womens leadership, iii) coherence across UNFCCC and UN, iv) gender-responsive implementation and means of implementation, and v) monitoring and reporting.

Pakistans ccGAP aims to integrate gender and climate fully in key sectors of the economy, particularly agriculture and food security, water and sanitation, disaster risk management, have been held to mobilize wider society for climate action and to ensure that vulnerable and strategies as a part of the Whole-of-government approach. For Pakistan, ccGAP is a tool to enhance knowledge and capacities, identify gaps and enabling conditions, and build coordination and actions to strengthen gender-responsive strategies and results to meet the countrys climate change objectives.

Tree Tsunami Programme (TBTTP), REDD+ (Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation), GLOF-II (Glacial Lake Outburst Floods), Pakistan Snow Leopard and Ecosystem Protection Program (PSLEP), and Chilgoza Restoration Project. In addition, the Green Stimulus PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 53 forestry, fisheries, horticulture, eco-tourism, wildlife area management and developing small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) through forestry operations and protected area management. All these under implementation projects are striving to generate gender data overall strategy to quantify inputs, outputs and outcomes at project and portfolio levels, an sectoral targets for Pakistan.

The National Commission on the Status of Women (NCSW) is a statutory body that was established in 2000 as an outcome of the national and international contributions of the Government of Pakistan (GoP). The Commission serves as the lead agency to mainstream gender. All provinces have also established their provincial commissions. Since the last submission, several provinces have developed their gender policies or action plans. However, climate impacts and womens role in climate mitigation and adaptation in urban and rural contexts still requires further embedding of NCSWs work.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202154 e 6.

e.

a.

b.

c.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 55 a.

a.

b.

a.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202156 PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 57 PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202158 PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 59 15 and 29. Pakistans growing young population offers demographic opportunities for climate action. The demographic dividend can best be harvested for climate adaptation and mitigation for youth, c) increasing youth involvement and inclusion, and d) ownership of climate-smart development.

A youth survey by MoCC has mapped the degree of climate awareness and contributions. Several youth and volunteer groups and their organizations were engaged in the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) consultative process. The engagement process focused on three core areas: a) review of NDC 2016 through youths perspective, b) a rapid survey on the (CSOs) working with youth groups. Gap analysis and proposed recommendations were mitigation measures in their communities and neighborhoods.

2. Work with youth groups to develop National Youth Strategy for Climate Action to strengthen individual and collective actions for adaptation and mitigation.

3. Involve youth in research and innovation for the NDC implementation, and develop an independent report on implementation by youth.

4. Engage with the Ministry of Education, Higher Education Commission, universities, and CSOs to propagate climate education curriculum.

Goals (SDGs) and set up SDG Support Units at the provincial Planning & Development Departments (P&DDs), coordinated by a secretariat at Pakistan Planning Commission. The Voluntary National Review (VNR) in 2019.

The provincial SDG units are charged to contribute towards integration of climate change measures into national and provincial policies, strategies and planning. All provincial units availability continues to be a shared challenge for Pakistan NDC and SDG implementation. PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202160 National Action Plan on Sustainable Consumption and Production (NAP-SCP, 2017) provides conceptual objectives and frameworks complemented by a set of suggested policy enablers and actions that could translate SCP into projects on the ground. The NAP-SCP is the road map for the country to achieve sustainable socio-economic development by eliminating inefficiencies and over-exploitation of resource base to protect environmental degradation transport, industry and education.

SDG 13 acknowledges that the UNFCCC is the main forum for negotiating the global climate climate change mitigation and adaptation for global sustainable development agenda. SDG 13 cuts across several SDGs and appears in targets under many other goals. SDG 13 reinforces the as one of the countries to achieve SDG-13 Climate Action.

According to SDG report 202013, Pakistans SDG index score improved whereby Pakistan was categorized as one of the countries that had achieved SDG-13.

6.3.1 CONTRIBUTIONS TO SDGS Table 6.2: SDG Objectives, Actions & Indicators SDG-13 Targets Objective Proposed Actions Lead Agency Potential Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate- related disasters  Improve capacities to mitigate risks and respond to climatic- related disasters  Develop district- level multi-hazard vulnerability assessments  Number of district level multi-hazard assessments in various provinces PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 61 Integrate climate change measures into policies and planning  Integrate climate consideration in development planning processes Line Ministries and Provincial Departments, FFC  Integration of climate considerations in PC-I form Build knowledge and capacity to meet climate change  Undertake studies to assess climate risks and identify sectoral decarbonization pathways MoCC, Provincial P&DDs, Academia, GCISC  Number of climate-related studies and risk assessments undertaken  Strengthen the processes around development and implementation of NDCs MoCC, GCISC  Development of an action plan for implementation of NDC.

Promote mechanisms to raise capacity for planning and management  Promote Integrated Water Resource Management  Undertake human and institutional capacity development on climate change issues FFC, Ministry of Water Resources (MOWR)  Number of climate-related capacity development initiatives rolled out PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202162 water and food insecurity concerns accentuate the need to follow a high economic growth pathway. The Government of Pakistan (GoP) will, therefore, follow the greenhouse gases (GHG) emissions trajectory of 1603 Mt CO! Eq. for 2030 as announced in Pakistans initial Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) submission in 2016. However, realizing the importance of reducing the GHG emissions under Paris Agreement to limit the temperatures to 1.5/2C, the GoP aims to reduce the emissions to the maximum possible extent. The GoP has taken a series 15% from the countrys own resources and 35% subject to provision of international grant finance that would require USD 101 billion just for energy transition.

Minister of Pakistan made an announcement to reduce future GHG emissions on a high priority basis if international financial and technical resources were made available:

MITIGATION:

1. RENEWABLE ENERGY: By 2030, 60 % of all energy produced in the country will be generated from renewable energy resources, including hydro.

2. TRANSPORTATION: By 2030, 30 % of all new vehicles sold in Pakistan in various categories will be Electric Vehicles (EVs).

3. COAL: From 2020 onwards, a moratorium is in place on new imported coal-based power plants and no generation of power through imported coal, plans for two new coal-fired PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 63 power plants have been shelved in favor of hydro-electric power, and there is increased focus on coal gasification and liquefaction for indigenous coal.

4. LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY: From 2016 onwards, continued investments in Nature- based Solutions (NbS) through the largest ever afforestation programs in the history of the country Ten Billion Tree Tsunami Program (TBTTP) will sequester 148.76 MtCO!e emissionsover the next ten years. The estimated project cost of aboutaV $800million   met nationally from indigenous resources, as unconditional contribution.

Pakistans priority contributions before the UN Summit in December 2020 will result in an estimated saving of around 1.7 Mt CO!eq14 on account of the two shelved coal power plants, 24 Mt CO!e, on account of the introduction of EVs, and 22 Mt CO!eq on account of stabilizing energy mix 40-60 in favor of renewable energy.

ADAPTATION:

5. RECHARGE PAKISTAN: By 2030, the project envisages the reduction of flood risk and enhanced water recharge at six sites in the Indus Basin, building resilience of 10 million people and vulnerable ecosystems. The Project is under review by the Green Climate Fund (GCF) for funding; in the meantime, Pakistan has allocated PKR 6 billion from national resources to commence the activities in three sites, namely Manchar & Hamal wetland, Taunsa pond area, and Dera Ismail Khan.

6. PROTECTED AREAS: By 2023, total protected areas in the country will be enhanced from 12% to 15% that will result in preserving rare fauna and flora, green job opportunities for 5,500 people, and promotion of eco-tourism.

Pakistans high priority contributions reflect deep commitment to the Paris Agreement and an increased ambition-heightened sense of urgency. For even deeper reductions, Pakistan seeks international support to realize this enhanced ambition for her low carbon development or decarbonization pathways. Pakistans overall mitigation financing gap and an estimated adaptation financing gap are presented below.

Emission Development pathways:

1. IN PROGRESS: More than 12 GW under construction requiring about $20 billion for Coal and Hydro projects (PPIB).

14 Emissions from coal power plant are 8.8 MtCO!e PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202164 2. HYDROPOWER: For rapid expansion of RE including hydropower, reaching 65%15 production by 2030 would require an estimated investment of US$50 billion by 2030 and $80 billion by 2040.

3. TRANSMISSION: An estimated US$20 billion is required to upgrade the transmission network by 2040. This will escalate in a case with large share of variable power from solar and wind.

4. COAL: Buying out the relatively new coal power projects, including the local Thar coal mines16, would upfront an estimated cost of US$18 billion. An additional estimated US$13 billion will be required to replace the production of the coal power plants with solar. Pakistan considers employing the instruments on enhanced ambition provided in Article 6 of the Paris Agreement. This may include the mitigation mechanism under Article 6.4 Paris as pilot integrated, holistic and balanced non-market approaches under Article 6.8, as outlined in Chapter 9 below.

4 of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and Articles 9, 10 and 11 of the Paris Agreement to fully implement the climate actions contained in these NDCs. These articles are explicit on supporting developing countries to implement climate change actions and increasing mitigation ambition, considering the common but of the Paris Agreement specifically committed that support shall be provided to developing country Parties for the implementation of this Article, in accordance with Articles 9, 10 and 11, recognizing that enhanced support for developing country Parties will allow for higher ambition in their actions.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 65 settlements and human displacements, biological and genetic diversity, and loss of coastal areas to seawater intrusion. Our need to access climate finance because of L&D is sharp and increasing.

Pakistans estimates of climate losses have thus far not covered long-term and non-economic for nutrition, stunting, pandemics, gender and other socio-cultural issues. Based on the weather and climate capacity strengthened in recent years, Pakistan will need 1. to undertake gap analysis to assess the current status of L&D and develop a roadmap based on rigorous methodology and costing, 2. to augment and utilize data management systems to record L&D in key sectors of the 3. to develop institutional mechanisms for L&D as articulated in the Warsaw International Mechanism (WIM) for Loss & Damage for systematic coordination with sectoral ministries, departments and the provinces.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202166 already adopted in its Nature-based Solutions (NbS) approach in initiatives such as Recharge Pakistan, Protective Areas Initiative (PAI), and Ten Billion Tree Tsunami Programme (TBTTP). and sub-national tiers alike. In the federation of Pakistan, the provincial governments are responsible for provincial policies, operational plans, and provincial-level governance reforms. There is, therefore, an additional standing need for harmonization and coordination of national and sub-national policies, and for synergizing the national agenda for climate action. The Ministry of Climate Change (MoCC) will work closely with line ministries and provincial Planning & Development Departments (P&DD) to mainstream climate considerations into over-arching development and sectoral planning in a gradual and systematic manner. The wide-ranging mandate of the MoCC requires capacity-development for strong scientific and technical knowledge. MoCC and other ministries and departments will also stand to benefit from institutional and policy reforms, strengthening and capacity-building enactment through upgraded rules, procedures, guidelines, and standard operating procedures (SOPs) for well- coordinated climate actions.

Improved climate forecasting, climate risk communication and early warning and comprehensive risk management framework is especially important for a country facing multiple climate hazards. Embedding climate change requires concurrent actions and investments in several arenas:

1. POLICIES: Cross-referencing to climate change in national and provincial sectoral policies and action plans on climate adaptation and mitigation will need improvements. Several policies will need to be refreshed or revised where they exist, or developed where they do PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 67 not in order to fully align with Pakistans climate change needs and contributions. Priority sectors are the ones dealing with mitigation and adaptation, already mentioned in this Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) submission.

2. INVESTMENT PROCESSES: Preparatory and approval systems dealing with the life-cycle of projects and schemes need to be made climate-smart in order to fully embed climate adaptation and mitigation indicators. MoCC will lead the process together with its provincial counterparts, and the Ministry will also provide technical support and backstopping for this purpose.

3. SCIENTIFIC/TECHNICAL CAPACITIES: While Pakistan has significantly augmented its climate modelling capacity and has established a robust National greenhouse gas (GHG) Inventory Management System since the NDC in 2016, the capacity need to be also developed for agricultural, health and economic costing purposes at national and provincial levels, as well as at selected universities and at technical research institutions. The areas of capacity and capability development include sub-national level application of General Circulation Models (GCMs); provincial GHG inventory capacities; early warning and forecasting systems for health (pandemics), flooding, weather, as well as attributive extreme events; and, economic and non-economic costing of climate Loss & Damage.

Additionally, there is need to augment data collection, usage and reporting systems as well as the decision-support system at the planning and sectoral ministries.

Accounting, GDP measurement, or annual allocations in the fiscal budgets and engagement. as ECNEC, and Public Sector Development Programme (PSDP), Central Development Working Party Meeting (CDWP), and Development Working Party (DWP) processes to mainstream whole-of-government in this regard.

The Prime Ministers Committee on Climate Change (PMCCC) will oversee the implementation progress as well as the regional and international partnerships and alliances to ensure that Pakistan continues to be an active member of global community for the implementation of Paris change adaptation and mitigation and develop a NDC Coordination and Implementation Plan (NCIP). For institutional reform and augmenting planning processes, MoCC will coordinate for climate proofing of planning processes such as PC-1.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202168 adaptation and mitigation targets in all sectors. In 2017, Pakistan conducted Technology Need Assessment (TNA) in order to tackle the recurring damage from extreme weather events. A possible outcome of the assessment was to help Pakistan delineate a holistic roadmap for National Climate Change Mitigation Technology Development. The study prioritized several technologies for mitigation and adaptation:

MITIGATION:

1. ENERGY: a) Efficiency improvements to boiler and furnace energy, b) Improving energy efficiency in building, and c) Solar energy technology. 2. AGRICULTURE AND LULUCF: a) Reforestation and reducing CO! emissions from forest degradation, and b) Farm forestry as a carbon sink.

3. TRANSPORT: a) Bus rapid transport, and b) Vehicle tuning.

ADAPTATION:

1. AGRICULTURE: a) High-efficiency irrigation systems for irrigated and rain-fed areas, b) Drought- tolerant crop varieties, and c) Climate monitoring and forecasting - early warning system.

2. WATER: a) Surface rainwater harvesting, b) Groundwater recharge, and c) Urban storm-water management.

Pakistan has tested or piloted several of these recommendations in various regions of the limitations or integrated investments that fully integrate and measure climate adaptation and mitigation. However, since no projects were undertaken in some areas between 2014 and 2021, there is a growing urgency to prioritize pilots, mostly missed so far:

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 69 Mitigation: Efficiency improvements to boiler and furnace energy (energy), Farm forestry as a carbon sink (Agriculture and land use, land-use change, and forestry sectors), and vehicle tuning in provinces (transportation).

Adaptation: Drought- tolerant crop varieties (agriculture), and Urban storm-water management (water). Collaboration on technology development and deployment for climate action has many co-benefits and it therefore remains an important priority for the Government of Pakistan. PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202170 project from Adaptation Fund, three from Green Climate Fund (GCF), and completed 15 projects (approved 19) from Global Environment Fund (GEF). Pakistan has thus far not accessed Climate Investment Funds (CIFs), major bilateral climate funds, or facilitiesexcept for one project from Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs). As of 2020, the GCF has approved projects worth approximately US$ 7.2 billion and Pakistan has secured about US$ 122 million through intermediary funding (UNDP, ADB, FAO) for three projects. MoCC, however, has supported the accreditation process of two national institutions to improve access to GCF through them for a range of financial instruments, including grants, grant equivalents, long-term concessional loans, equities and guarantees. Additionally, Pakistans recent and new World Bank commitments had the highest contribution of climate co-benefits CCBs17 that reached 44% in FY21 (up from 34% in FY20), and is the highest in South Asias WB portfolio and among the highest in the World.

Pakistan considers employing the instruments on enhanced ambition provided in Article 6 of the Paris Agreement. This may include the mitigation mechanism under Article 6.4 of the Paris Agreement, as well as bilateral cooperative approaches under Article. 6.2. Pakistan may also pilot integrated, holistic and balanced non-market approaches under Article 6.8, as described below.

Market and non-market-based approaches help in diversifying the funding sources for commissioning capital-intensive projects. Some of the initiatives that Pakistan has embarked upon include:

17 CCBs refer to the share of World Banks lending commitments that contributes to climate action.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 71 3. GREEN BONDS: Water and Power Development Authority (WAPDA) has launched 10-yearGreen Bonds and has raised $500 million for a hydro-energy project. Given the encouraging market response, WAPDA is considering launching additional green bonds. Pakistan may launch additional bonds in other sectors. Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan (SECP) has approved national guidelines for green bonds that will encourage innovative financing mechanisms in several sectors for both adaptation and mitigation. 4. NATURE PERFORMANCE BONDS (NPB): Building on an earlier experience with the Government of Italy, Pakistan is engaged with several bilateral and other development partners to channel outstanding payments into conservation and climate-related investments via NPB. If successful in implementing the first pilot project, Pakistan will capitalize from countrys performance shown in the last few years through various flagship projects.

5. CARBON PRICING INSTRUMENT: Under the Collaborative Instruments for Ambitious Climate Action (CIACA) program, Pakistan has received support to establish Carbon Pricing Instrument (CPI). A range of activities have commenced including capacity building on carbon pricing, national consultation on carbon pricing, and scoping of pricing instruments in Pakistani context. The aim is to explore options for the introduction of domestic CPIs to manage the cohort of large-scale emitting installations, representing around 27% of domestic emissions, as well as an opportunity for similar or related economic instruments for the transport sector that. A National Committee on the Establishment of Carbon Markets (NCEC) oversees the development of potential architecture of a carbon market landscape in Pakistan.

6. BLUE CARBON: The Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) in 2016 had not covered mangrove forests, even after Pakistan had increased mangrove coverage from 477 sq. km. in 1990 to approximately 1,464 sq. km. in 2020, with a 3.74% annual rate of change. The existing mangrove forests and tidal marshes potentially store approximately 21.8 million tonnes of organic carbon (or 76.4 million tonnes of CO!e)18. A rapid assessment report19 has found using the terrestrial forest price of carbon credits of US$ 3 and aspirational blue carbon prices of US$12-15; revenue generated would be US$75 million and US$300-500 million, respectively. Carbon removals would continue beyond 2050 sustaining ongoing revenue.

While this preliminary assessment requires further research, a combination of market and non-market-based approaches like Blue bonds can help meet Pakistan mitigation and adaptation objectives in mangrove forests, and also reap co-benefits of livelihood and biodiversity protection.

19 World Bank. 2021. Pakistan Blue Carbon Rapid Assessment : Policy Recommendations for the Revision of Nationally Determined Contribution. World Bank, Washington, DC.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202172 7. SUSTAINABLE FINANCE FRAMEWORK: The creation of a Sustainable Finance Framework (SFF) would allow the GoP to issue green, social and sustainability bonds, as well as loans, through the Ministry of Finance (MoF). SFF will provide guidance on identifying eligible expenditures, share best practices on setting up required systems to implement the framework and organize a Second Party Opinion (SPO) on the SFF.

The State Bank of Pakistan (SBP) in 2017 approved green banking guidelines to promote environmental risk management within the commercial banks and encourage climate finance that to reduce vulnerabilities. SBP has also determined to develop a framework for risk management systems. A steering committee comprising of the SBP, International Finance Corporation (IFC), and the Pakistan Banks Association was constituted to oversee the progress. federal implementing agencies in developing, procuring, and implementing infrastructure waste management; low-cost housing, and health and education facilities). The Authoritys environmental safeguard policies cover several aspects of climate induced risks and exposures. The PPPA can facilitate the flow of financing for implementation of the NDC and adaptation and mitigation priorities from the GCF, as the Minsitry of Climate Change has already pursued direct access modalities for climate finance through accreditation of JS Bank and National Rural Support Programme (NRSP) as the National Implementing Entity.

PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 73 Global Change Impact Studies Centre (GCISC) to gauge the national GHG emissions. This inventory has been prepared based on the latest data sets available, using Inter-governmental other Land Use (AFOLU), and iv) Waste. The estimation under the Inventory shows the total emissions from Pakistan are 489.87 MtCO!eq for the year 2018, with i) the Energy sector (223.45) and iv) Waste (21.72) MtCO! equivalent, respectively. The key GHGs of concern are Carbon dioxide (CO!), methane (CH%), and nitrous oxide (N!O).

Table10.1: Summary of GHG Emissions (2017-18) Sectors Sub-Sectors Emissions (Mt CO!e) Energy Energy Industries 43.40 218.94 Manufacturing Industries and Construction 66.20 Others (commercial, residential & agricultural) Fugitive Fuel emissions 3.94 PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 202174 Industrial Processes and Product Use (IPPU) Mineral industry 22.75 25.76 Non-Energy Fuel and Solvent use product 0.10 Others (paper & pulp, Food 7 beverages) 0.20 Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land use (AFOLU) Livestock 109.12 223.45 (198.59 + 24.86) Waste Solid Waste Disposal 10.23 21.72 Waste incineration and open burning 0.9 Wastewater treatment and discharge 11.90 The 2018 inventory is based on revised 2006 IPCC guidelines, in the light of the Katowice Decision. Increasing energy needs and food security concerns have led to increases in the emissions in Energy and Agriculture sector by 19% and 14% respectively as compared to the GHG inventory of 2015.

It has been estimated that Pakistan has achieved a target of 8.7% reduction in GHG emissions in 2018 out of the 20% committed cumulative target of 2030 and this mainly has been attained from climate compatible efforts.

10.2 MONITORING REPORTING & VERIFICATION (MRV) As a signatory to the Paris Agreement, Pakistan is deeply committed to its implementation.

The countries are required, under Enhanced Transparency Framework (ETF), to regularly track to account for GHG emissions, track mitigation, and adaptation Policies & Measures (P&M) as well as support needed and received. Further, under the ETF, Parties are expected to submit their first biennial transparency reports (BTRs) and national inventory reports, if submitted separately, no later than 31 December 2024.

In this context, a broader GHG MRV system has been developed to establish historical compliance. An overarching objective for mitigation MRV is to ensure that estimates are PAKISTAN: UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS 2021 75 consistent and captured within the national inventory, BTR reporting, and feed into the Paris Agreements global stocktake. Therefore, a broader GHG MRV system, RISQa web platform for the compilation of the national MRV system database, has been developed. It will be used by entering into agreements with the key data providing national agencies. Similarly, efforts are underway to develop the national adaptation M&E system by developing a roadmap for its future setup, based on pilot experimentation in the agriculture sector.

