Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).

The Philippines NDC supports the countrys national development objectives and priorities of sustainable industrial development, poverty eradication and inclusive growth, energy security, and social and climate justice, and the transformation of its socio-economic sectors towards a climate and disaster-resilient and low carbon economy.

The Philippines shares the view that the NDC is a means to communicate opportunities for transforming our world with gender-responsive sustainable development options through the commitment of Parties to support and complement each others endeavors in accordance with the partnership arrangement under the UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement.

Developed through a whole-of-government-and-society approach, the Philippines NDC upholds the importance of meaningful participation of women, children, youth, persons with diverse sexual orientation and gender identity, differently abled, indigenous peoples, elderly, local communities, civil society, faith-based organizations, and the private sector, and recognizes the indispensable value of inclusion and collaborative participation of local governments in implementing climate actions. It shall enable a market signal to support local and foreign direct green investments. The NDC recognizes the private sector as the countrys main engine of economic growth and transformation, and promotes its full engagement in climate change adaptation and mitigation.

Aware of its exposure and vulnerability to climate change impacts and the increasing losses and damages the Philippines is incurring, it is employing its full national political strength to address the problem of climate change. Thus, the NDC is also based on and informed by national laws, as well as domestic legal, financial, and policy frameworks, with the accompanying instruments and institutional arrangements on adaptation and mitigation, foremost of which is Republic Act No. 9729, otherwise known as the Climate Change Act of 2009, as amended by Republic Act No. 10174, and its requisite policy instruments, the National Framework Strategy on Climate Change 2010-2022 and the National Climate Change Action Plan 2011-2028. The NDC also considers the Philippine Development Plan 2017-2022, Philippine Energy Plan 2018-2040, the Philippine National Security Policy 2017- 2022, National Climate Risk Management Framework of 2019 and the Sustainable Finance Policy Framework of 2020. It shall also be progressively informed by the Filipino peoples aspirations across generations.

The Philippines, in line with its national security policy and its sustainable development aspirations and in solidarity with ASEAN Member States, shall endeavor to peak its emissions by 2030 in the context of accelerating the just transition of its sectors into a green economy and the delivery of green jobs and other benefits of a climate and disaster-resilient and low carbon development to its people, among others.

The NDC upholds the importance of ensuring ecosystems integrity and promoting the countrys obligations on human rights and the rights of its indigenous peoples. The Philippines recognizes the importance of traditional knowledge, education and public awareness, and enhancement of climate actions through measures embodied in Article 12 of the Paris Agreement, and shall endeavor to institute a multi-level mechanism in this regard in the implementation of the NDC.

Tropical Cyclone belt and the Pacific Ring of Fire, it is extremely vulnerable to climate-related and geological hazards that include around 20 tropical cyclones every year and an almost daily occurrence of seismic shocks which cost the country an average of 0.5% of its GDP annually. 3 It is burdened with 16.7% poverty incidence 4 and saddled with an aging infrastructure and intermittent insecurities in the food and agriculture and health sectors.

Despite these, the Philippines remains steadfast in achieving zero poverty by 2040 and Loss and damage from extreme weather events are increasing at an unacceptable rate, reaching 4% of GDP in 2013 due to Super Typhoon Haiyan.6 The successive typhoons in October and November 2020 alone resulted in approximately USD 852 million in losses and damages in agriculture and infrastructure.7 In the energy sector, Super Typhoon Goni alone destroyed USD 56.3 million worth of infrastructure in 25 provinces in the country.8 Noting the increasing difficulty for fast and timely recovery, it is apparent that the loss and damage impacts of these climate events are outstripping the countrys capacity to withstand climate shocks.

(4) metric tons per capita.

The Philippines commits to a projected GHG emissions reduction and avoidance of 75%, of which 2.71% is unconditional 9 and 72.29% is conditional, 10 representing the countrys ambition for GHG mitigation for the period 2020 to 2030 for the sectors of agriculture, wastes, industry, transport, and energy. 11 This commitment is referenced against a projected business-as-usual cumulative economy-wide emission of 3,340.3 MtCO2e 12 for the same period.

The countrys climate change mitigation actions shall strengthen the resilience and adaptive capacity of the country, including through enhanced access to climate finance, technology development and transfer, and capacity building, especially on the implementation of the policies and measures on and the uptake of circular economy and sustainable consumption and production practices.

The implementation of the mitigation commitments shall be undertaken through bilateral, regional and multilateral cooperation. In addition, the benefits of market and non-market mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement shall continue to be explored, consistent with national circumstances and sustainable development aspirations.

The National Climate Change Action Plan 2011 - 2028 established the seven thematic areas of government action to address climate change, namely food security, water sufficiency, ecological and environmental stability, human security, climate-smart industries and services, sustainable energy, and knowledge and capacity development, which are pursued coherently with the Sustainable Development Goals and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.

The Philippines shall undertake adaptation measures across but not limited to, the sectors of agriculture, forestry, coastal and marine ecosystems and biodiversity, health, and human security, to preempt, reduce and address residual loss and damage. The Philippines shall pursue forest protection, forest restoration and reforestation, and access to results-based finance in forest conservation. The country shall also endeavor to undertake equitable adaptation strategies with mitigation co-benefits and ensure their contribution to the national pandemic recovery. For this purpose, the Philippines shall diligently access the means of implementation under the Paris Agreement.

