Papua New Guineas Enhanced Nationally Determined Contribution For more information contact: Climate Change and Development Authority Address: PO Box 4107 BOROKO National Capital District Telephone: (+675) 7091 0300 Email: info@ccda.gov.pg Published by the Climate Change and Development Authority Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea December, 2020 ISBN: 978-9980-911-89-6 Copy @ 2020 Climate Change Development Authority Papua New Guinea signed the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in June 1992 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, and became a Party after its ratification in March 1993. On 21st September 2016, PNG ratified the Paris Agreement in New York during the 72nd Session of the United Nations General Assembly. PNG is also a member of the Small Island Developing States (SIDS) and aligns itself with the Alliance of the Small Island Developing States (AOSIS) in the context of the UNFCCC. PNG is the current Chair of the Coalition for Rainforest Nations (CfRN), engaging in negotiations under the UNFCCC for its 52 member countries, especially on Article 6 of the Paris Agreement. PNG established the Climate Change and Development Authority (CCDA) under its national Climate Change Management Act 2015 (CCMA), with the primary role of facilitating and developing appropriate policies, and regulatory framework to address climate change in the country. The Act is currently under review to ensure that it can effectively respond to the needs of and PNGs obligations under the Paris Agreement. The Government of PNG (GoPNG) has shown its commitment to fulfilling its obligations under the UNFCCC. This includes mainstreaming climate change in its development priorities, as captured in the national long-term political vision, plans, and strategies of; PNG Vision 2050, the National Development Strategic Plan 2010-2030, and the Medium Term Development Plan III. These strategies are founded on the concepts of helping to strengthen and diversify the foundations of PNGs economic growth while taking action to both increase the countrys resilience to climate change and take steps to further mitigate emissions. The most recent steps in developing these policy approaches have been the development of PNGs SDG 13 Climate Action Roadmap as well as the development of the National REDD+ Strategy (NRS). The development of PNGs Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) aligns with the national strategies noted above and builds on the first NDC submitted in 2016. This NDC further aligns with sectorial policies, plans, and strategies that stakeholders will implement in response, existing challenges and circumstances. PNGs NDC sets out a comprehensive package of policies and measures, sectorial targets, and sector-specific actions that are tailored towards meeting defined contributions to addressing climate change through both immediate action and developing the enabling environment and technical capacity for an ongoing process of increased ambition. The document is, in compliance with the Enhanced Transparency Framework (ETF) requirements as stipulated under the Paris Agreement. The contributions outlined in this NDC are all conditional. The NDC outlines key pathways towards sustainable economic development in line with the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals  in particular, Goal 13 on Climate Action. The central element of this is; maintaining PNGs high forest cover (currently reported at 78 percent1) and reducing emissions from both the AFOLU and Energy Sectors covering two (2) of the four (4) emitting sectors from PNGs first Biennial Update Report submitted in 2019. Adaptation is a high priority due to the climate-related hazards that already pose significant risks to PNG today. PNGs commitment to adaptation for 2020-2030 will focus on four priority development sectors of agriculture, health, transport, and infrastructure. The PNGs National Adaptation Plan which is due for completion in 2021 will align with this enhanced NDC. The commitment here seeks to ensure a gender-responsive and human rights-based approach in all related planning, programming, and implementation. This includes the participation of men, women, youths, and vulnerable groups in consultations, planning, decision making and implementation in the identified sectors, as well as ensuring men, women and youths have opportunities to develop sustainable low-carbon livelihoods.

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 1. Forest and Land Use Change in Papua New Guinea 2000  2015. (2019).

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution ii Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution iii Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU) Biomass fuels or biofuels Carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2 eq) Coalition for Rainforest Nations Adjustment in natural or human systems in response to actual or expected climatic stimuli or their effects, which moderates harm or exploits beneficial opportunities.

Planting of new forests on lands that historically have not contained forests.

Starting year of the inventory. A fuel produced from dry organic matter or combustible oils produced by plants. These fuels are considered renewable as long as the vegetation producing them is maintained or replanted, such as firewood, alcohol fermented from sugar, and combustible oils extracted from soy beans. Their use in place of fossil fuels cuts greenhouse gas emissions because the plants that are the fuel sources capture carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.

In the context of climate change, the process of developing the technical skills and institutional capability in developing countries and economies in transition to enable them to address effectively the causes and results of climate change.

A measure to compare different greenhouse gases based on their contribution to radiative forcing. The UNFCCC currently (2005) uses global warming potentials (GWPs) as factors to calculate carbon dioxide equivalent.

Data collected by interrogation or count of an entire population.

A voluntary grouping of largely developing nations with rainforests which addresses issues surrounding environmental sustainability specific to tropical rainforests. Participation does not necessarily imply that countries adhere to any specific domestic policies or negotiating positions within the international context. At September 2011, the group included Argentina, Bangladesh, Belize, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chile, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote dIvoire, DR Congo, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, El Salvador, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Jamaica, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malaysia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Samoa, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Suriname, Thailand, Uruguay, Uganda, Vanuatu and Vietnam. Countries participate on a voluntarily basis primarily through unified negotiating positions, workshops and collaborative programs.

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution iv Data for either activities or emission that are based on research carried out on sites either in that country or otherwise representative of that country.

Is the conversion of forest land to any non-forest land. Primary deforestation is the conversion of primary forest. Secondary deforestation is the conversion of degraded forest.

Is the conversion of primary forest to disturbed forest One of the four main anthropogenic greenhouse gas emitting sectors according to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines concerned with the combustion of fossil fuels, fugitive emission and carbon.

The atmospheric gases responsible for causing global warming and climate change. The major GHGs are carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O). Less prevalent but very powerful greenhouse gases are hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (IMOs) and sulphur hexafluoride (SF6).

Established in 1988 by the World Meteorological Organization and the UN Environment Program, the IPCC surveys world-wide scientific and technical literature and publishes assessment reports that are widely recognized as the most credible existing sources of information on climate change. The IPCC also works on methodologies and responds to specific requests from the Conventions subsidiary bodies. The IPCC is independent of the Convention.

An international agreement standing on its own, and requiring separate ratification by governments, but linked to the UNFCCC. The Kyoto Protocol, among other things, sets binding targets for the reduction of greenhouse-gas emissions by industrialized countries.

The type of vegetation, rock, water, etc. covering the earths surface.

The type of activity being carried out on a unit of land. A greenhouse gas inventory sector that covers emissions and removals of greenhouse gases resulting from direct human-induced land use, land-use change and forestry activities.

At COP 16 in Cancun in 2010, Governments established a work program in order to consider approaches to address loss and damage associated with climate change impacts in developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change as part of the Cancun Adaptation Framework.

In the context of climate change, a human intervention to reduce the sources or enhance the sinks of greenhouse gases. Examples include using fossil fuels more efficiently for industrial processes or electricity generation, switching to solar energy or wind power, improving the insulation of buildings, and expanding forests and other sinks to remove greater amounts of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.

Green Climate Fund (GCF) Greenhouse gases (GHGs) Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Land use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF) Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution v Measurement, reporting and verification (MRV) National Adaptation Programmes National Determined Contribution (NDC) Measurable, reportable and verifiable. A process/concept that potentially supports greater transparency in the climate change regime.

Documents prepared by least developed countries (LDCs) identifying urgent and immediate needs for adapting to climate change.

A document submitted in accordance with the Convention (and the Protocol) by which a Party informs other Parties of activities undertaken to address climate change. Most developed countries have now submitted their fifth national communications; most developing countries have completed their first national communication and are in the process of preparing their second.

According to Article 4 paragraph 2 of the Paris Agreement, each Party shall prepare, communicate and maintain successive nationally determined contributions (NDCs) that it intends to achieve. Parties shall pursue domestic mitigation measures, with the aim of achieving the objectives of such contributions.

A state (or regional economic integration organization such as the European Union) that agrees to be bound by a treaty and for which the treaty has entered into force.

The population is the totality of items under consideration. In the case of a random variable, the probability distribution is considered to define the population of that variable.

Removal of greenhouse gases and/or their precursors from the atmosphere by sink.

Any process, activity or mechanism which removes a greenhouse gas, an aerosol, or a precursor of a greenhouse gas from the atmosphere. (UNFCCC Article 1.8) Notation in the final stages of reporting is negative (-) sign.

Any process or activity which releases a greenhouse gas, an aerosol, or a precursor of a greenhouse gas into the atmosphere. (UNFCCC Article 1.9) Notation in the final stages of reporting is the positive (+) sign.

A time series is a series of values which are affected by random processes and which are observed at successive (usually equidistant) points in time.

The trend of a quantity measures its change over a time period, with a positive trend value indicating growth in the quantity, and a negative value indicating a decrease. It is defined as the ratio of the change in the quantity over the time period, divided by the initial value of the quantity, and is usually expressed either as a percentage or a fraction.

Guideline for estimating emissions and (removals) of particular gases from the four (4) anthropogenic greenhouse gas sectors. Energy Sector; Industrial Processes and Product Use Sector; Agricultures, Forestry and Other Land-Use; and Waste Sector.

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution vi The degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to cope with, adverse effects of climate change, including climate variability and extremes. Vulnerability is a function of the character, magnitude, and rate of climate variation to which a system is exposed, its sensitivity, and its adaptive capacity.

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution vii ABM Australia Bureau of Meteorology AFOLU Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use AOSIS Alliance of the Small Island States BUR Biennial update report CCDA Climate Change and Development Authority CCMA Climate Change Management Act CfRN Coalition for Rainforest Nations CHARM Comprehensive Hazards and Risk Management COP Conference of Parties DNPM Department of National Planning and Monitoring ETF Enhanced Transparency Framework FAO The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations FRDP Pacifics Framework for Resilient Development Plan FRL Forest Reference Level GEF Global Environment Facility GoPNG Government of Papua New Guinea ICCAI International Climate Change Adaptation Initiative INC Initial National Communication INDC Intended Nationally Determined Contributions.

IOC International Ocean Commission IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change IPPU Industrial processes and product use Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution viii Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution ix LNG Liquefied Natural Gas LULUCF Land use, land-use change and forestry MTDP Medium-Term Development Plan MRV Measurement, reporting and verification NAP National Adaptation Plan NC National Communication NCCDMP National Climate Compatible Development Management Policy NDA National Designated Authority NDC Nationally determined contribution NEC National Executive Council NRS National REDD+ Strategy 20172027 NSO National Statistical Office RFIP REDD+ Finance and Investment Plan SIDS Small Island Developing States SNC Second National Communication STaRs Strategy for the Responsible Development for PNG STWC Sub-technical Working Committee UNDP United Nations Development Programme UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change The Paris Agreement under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is the cornerstones that bind international obligations on climate change globally. The Paris Agreement specifically challenges Parties under Article 3 to take robust climate action, through what has become known as the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC). Papua New Guinea (PNG) like all other Parties is required to communicate its ambitious targets and report on progression overtime on how PNG through national action is contributing towards achieving the long term temperature and adaptation goals set under Article 2 of the Paris Agreement.

The NDC is an articulation of PNGs mitigation and adaptation contributions. It sets out targets and identifies measures and actions to be pursued towards achieving these targets. It contains five (5) chapters which outline the following:

Chapter 1 (National Context) provides a general synopsis of PNG, setting out information on the countrys geography; climate; population; an overview on economic development; an assessment of the impacts and vulnerabilities; and an outline of key climate change policies, institutions, and regulatory frameworks.

Chapter 2 (Summary of Information on Clarity, Transparency and Understanding) establishes the reference point, period of implementation, methodology, scope and sector coverage, and a summary of targets.

Chapter 3 (Papua New Guineas Mitigation Contribution) focuses on mitigation targets and potential actions and measures to be taken in sectors identified: Energy Sectors and LULUCF sub-sector;

Chapter 5 (Means of Implementation) discusses matters pertaining to implementation. The chapter contains a needs assessment which covers general support, finances and capacity building.

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution x PNG is an island country in the South Pacific Region, located between the Equator and the Tropic of Capricorn. It shares the international land border with Indonesia to the west, and maritime borders with Australia to the south, the Solomon Islands to the east, and the Federated States of Micronesia to the north. It has a total land area of (46.13 million hectares), 97 percent2 of which is customarily owned by local indigenous people, while 3 percent is alienated land owned by the State.

Owing to its geographical proximity to the northward moving Australian continental plate and the northwest moving Pacific plate, PNG is located in one of the most tectonically active areas in the world, also known as the ring of fire. The country is bestowed with remarkable diversity and extraordinary landscapes, terrestrial ecosystems, rich flora and fauna with accommodating climatic conditions.

PNGs climate is classified as an Af climate according to Koppen Geiger Classification with hot, humid tropical climate experienced all year round3. The country experiences two distinctive seasons: wet and dry - whereby the wet season occurs from December to March, and the dry season from June to September. PNGs average monthly rainfall ranges between 250mm  350mm, with average temperatures between 26  28 degrees Celsius. Humidity is relatively high in PNG, ranging between 70 - 90 percent4.

2. Papua New Guinea First Biennial Update Report .(2019). NATIONAL CONTEXT 1 GEOGRAPHY & CLIMATE Figure 1 Map of Papua New Guinea. Source CCDA Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 1 PNG is ranked as the tenth most vulnerable country in the world to the risk of climate change5. PNGs highlands region is susceptible to extreme weather such as heavy rainfall, which may increase the occurrence of landslides and inland flooding. The coastal regions, the islands and the low-lying atoll areas are mostly vulnerable to extreme weather events, storm surge, sea-level rise, and coastal inundation.

With more than 75 - 80 percent of the population living in rural areas6, the risk of exposure to natural hazards is very high. PNGs rural populations are mostly subsistence farmers that rely on subsistence farming for their livelihoods, with limited capacity to protect themselves from climate-induced natural disasters. The rugged mountainous terrain as well as limited access to basic infrastructures such as roads and bridges has hindered rural communities to access health care, education and broader development opportunities. Women are particularly vulnerable due to the lack of access to land, income, credit and other resources. This lack of access impedes their ability to cope with climate stresses and disasters.

About 60 percent of PNGs population is under the age of 25 years7. Much of this group experience poverty as a result of lack of access to education and employment opportunities. The literacy rate for young men is 67 percent, and for young women, 79 percent8. Approximately 28.4 percent of young people (between the ages of 15-24) are not employed or otherwise participating in educational or vocational training opportunities9.

PNGs climate is projected to change as shown in Table 1 below. According to the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO), there is a high confidence level of different climate variables increasing over the course of the 21st century.

These projections are expected to raise exposure levels and increased vulnerability to shifting climatic conditions and will impact the growing population and economic development.

IMPACTS & VULNERABILITY 5. World Risk Report. (2016). 6. Papua New Guineas Voluntary National Review 2020- Progress of Implementing the Sustainable Development Goals. (2020).

7. Papua New Guinea Young People. (2018).

8. Education for All 2000  2015: Achievements and Challenges. (2015) 9. International Labour Organization. Youth Labour Statistics. (2020). Table 1 Climate Projections for Papua New Guinea Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 2 structures and depend on subsistence farming, supplemented by cash cropping. Thirty nine percent of the overall population live in the Highlands region, 26 percent in the Momase region, with the Southern and New Guinea Islands regions totalling 20 percent and 15 percent of the population respectively.

Sustainable economic development is a priority agenda for the Government of Papua New Guinea (GoPNG), and is reflected as a long-term goal in the PNG Vision 2050 (Vision 2050), for PNG to be a Smart, Wise, Fair, Healthy and Happy Society. To implement the Vision 2050, the PNG Development Strategic Plan 2010-2030 was developed and endorsed by the National Executive Council (NEC), which sets out key targets and more detailed strategies. This serves as the building block to achieving the requirements of the Vision 2050. To ensure that the priority pillars of the Vision 2050 are met, a 5-year plan called the Medium-Term Development Plan (MTDP) was developed with specific sector targets and indicators.

PNG is a developing country and has a dual economy, consisting of both the formal and informal economy. The formal economy is made up of the large-scale extractive mining and petroleum sector, and the primary industries sector including; forestry, fishing, and commercial agriculture. It employs 15 percent of the total workforce. The informal economy on the other hand supports 85 percent of the population through subsistence agriculture11 and is dominated by women.

Despite the abundance of natural resources and economic growth recorded since 2013, PNGs economy faces numerous challenges. The rugged terrain and the high costs of infrastructure hamper the exploitation and development of natural resources, and consequently, the formal and informal economies which support it. The GoPNG, with the support of development partners and investors, aims to pursue economic activities to realize sustainable economic development.

SUSTAINABLE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 10. National Population and Housing 2011. (2013).

11. Papua New Guinea, First Biennial Update Report. (2019).

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 3 Papua New Guinea is a signatory to the UNFCCC since 13th June 1992 and has been engaged in international climate change negotiations. PNG ratified the UNFCCC on 16th March 1993. In 2015, the Paris Agreement was adopted, and PNG ratified the agreement on 21st September 2016. In 2016, PNG enacted the United Nations Paris Agreement Act 2016, which gives domestic effect to the Paris Agreement and provides a legal basis under which the NDC is administered in PNG, together with the Climate Change Management Act, 2015.

The Climate Change and Development Authority CCDA is the National Designated Authority that coordinates all climate change-related matters in PNG. CCDA is also the focal point to the UNFCCC. As the coordinating agency, CCDA works in collaboration with stakeholders, with the objective of providing a coordination mechanism at the national and provincial level for research, analysis, and development of the policy and the legislative framework to move towards a low carbon economy and achieving climate-resilient development in the country.

BUR1 contains the results achieved by PNG from reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and enhancement of forest carbon stock (REDD+) initiatives in the AFOLU sector as a Technical Annex. The Third National Communication (Third NC) and BUR2 are planned to be submitted by 2021 which will provide an update of the Second NC and BUR1. Further improvement will be needed to comply with the Enhanced Transparency Framework (ETF) as per Decision 18/CMA. PNG submitted its NDC on 24th March 2016 in which its contributions and pledges were declared conditional and subject to relevant technical and funding support made available by the developed countries through relevant international funding sources. It proposed that PNGs main contributions will come from the existing REDD+ initiatives under the Agriculture Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU) sector, and a 100 percent renewable energy target set for 2030 as well as promotion of energy efficiency uses in all appliances from the energy sector. The other important component of the contributions would be from climate-resilient development in the country and enhancing adaptation in the livelihood of the rural population which amounts to 75  80 percent12 of the 8.25 million13 people in PNG.

CLIMATE CHANGE POLICY, INSTITUTIONS & REPORTING HISTORY Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 4 United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). This allowed PNG to prepare a submission for RBP to the Green Climate Fund (GCF) and other donor agencies.

Energy Sector amounted to 11,806 Gg CO2 eq in 2015 an increase of 5,532 Gg CO2 eq when compared to 2000.

Industrial Process and Product Use amounted to 35 Gg CO2 eq in 2015 an increase of 1.4 Gg CO2 eq when compared to 2000.

Agriculture sector amounted to 796 Gg CO2 eq in 2015, an increase of 114 Gg CO2 eq when compared with the year 2000.

Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) sector historically acted as a sink.

However, the sector has evolved into a smaller sink over time due to the decrease in forest lands over time. The net emissions from the LULUCF sector amounted to 1,716 Gg CO2 eq in 2015 compared to - 21,636 Gg CO2 eq in 2000 which is a total decrease of removals amounting to 23,370 Gg CO2 eq.

Waste sector amounted to 873 Gg CO2 eq in 2015, an increase of 354 Gg CO2 eq when compared to 2000.

SUMMARY OF EMISSIONS AND REMOVALS FOR PNG According to the BUR1, the total net Greenhouse Gas Emissions in 2015 amounted to 15,193 Gg CO2 eq compared to the emissions in 2000 which was -14,179 Gg CO2 eq. Therefore, PNG went from a net sink in 2000 to a net source in 2015. Below are emissions from each sector:

Figure 2 Time Series of PNGs Total Emission and Removals Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 5 14. Papua New Guinea, National REDD+ Strategy 2017-2027. (2017). SUMMARY OF INFORMATION ON CLARITY, TRANSPARENCY & UNDERSTANDING 2 The current Enhanced NDC utilizes 2015 as the base year for all emission targets with information being based on PNGs current Greenhouse Gas Inventory Report for Papua New Guinea of that year.15 The targeted GHG for this NDC is carbon dioxide (CO2).

No reference point is provided for the Adaptation Targets due to the diverse adaptation interventions at different levels of development.

The NDC Implementation Period is from 2020 to 2030. This is based on the accompanied decisions to the Paris Agreement adopted in 201516.

The Climate Change and Development Authority is the National Designated Authority of Papua New Guinea that is responsible to implement the Paris Agreement and commitments under the UNFCCC, in close collaboration with line agencies. CCDA provided a coordination mechanism at the national level for the PNG Enhanced NDC through existing institutional frameworks and newly created to best support the successful revision of the NDC.

The coordination by CCDA with Development Partners and Stakeholders is well outlined in Figure 3.

PAPUA NEW GUINEAS NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT & PLANNING PROCESS 15. Papua New Guineas First Biennial Update Report. (2019).

16. Paragraph 23 of decision 1/CP.21 Requests those Parties whose intended nationally determined contribution pursuant to decision 1/CP.20 contains a time frame up to 2025 to communicate by 2020 a new nationally determined contribution and to do so every five years thereafter pursuant to Article 4, paragraph 9, of the Agreement.

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 6 In planning for the revision of the enhanced NDC, CCDA has ensured the following necessary steps were taken to ensure better coordination through National Consultation and NDC Coordination through various steps outlined in Figure 4;

NDC Partnership Members  Engagement of NDC Activities in PNG Figure 3 PNGs NDC Institutional Arrangement Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 7  AFLOU Sector NDC implementation Activities  Energy Sector NDC implementation Acitivities  Adaption Sector NDC implementation Acitivities Figure 4 PNG NDC Preparations and Planning Engagement of NDC Activities in PNG NDC Implementation Key Submission DatesPNG NDC Preparation  PNG becomes member of NDC Partnership  PNG Participated in the CAEP Program under NDC Partnership  CAEP program was accepted and endorsed by NDC Partnership  Fromation of CCDA NDC TWC  Delegation of Chapter to CCDA NDC TWC Members  CCDANDC TWC Meetings  6 meetings  Aug to Dec 2019 Central Agencies Coordinating Committee National Executive Council (NEC) Minister of Climate Change Climate Change and Development Authority Key Stakeholders Government, Private Sector and NGOs Adaption Sub-technical Working Committee Key Stakeholders Key Stakeholders AFOLU Sub-technical Working Committee Energy Sub-technical Working Committee AFOLU Sector Lead Energy Sector Lead PNG National NDC Focal Point NDC Key Development Partners The NDC is consistent with the methodologies used in the preparation and development of the BUR1 using the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories.

PNG adopted the baseline method in the determination of contributions and in compiling its NDC. Whilst there are existing laws, policies, measures, and initiatives that will guide actions going forward, effective implementation will require structural adjustments to the domestic regulatory framework, institutional measures, financing, and additional action (including projects). Hence, the NDC will be assessed against the identified baselines, as opposed to considering the contributions and targets as business as usual.

PNGs emissions account for a minimal percentage of global emissions. Despite this, PNG has made significant commitments to address the impacts of climate change, with the proposed targets considered to be very ambitious as assessed against PNGs levels of development, its status as a Small Island Developing State (SIDS) and its emissions profile. The NDC is in line with PNGs Vision 2050 as well as the Climate Compatible Development Management Policy accords. The policy outlines the governments commitment, to be 50 percent carbon neutral by 2030, and be entirely carbon neutral by 2050.

The NDC commits to ensuring gender-responsive and human rights-based approach in all related planning, programming, and implementation. This includes the participation of women, youth and vulnerable groups in consultations, planning and decision making in the sectors, as well as to ensure women and youth have opportunities to develop sustainable low-carbon livelihoods.

DEVELOPMENT METHODOLOGY CONSIDERATION OF NDC BEING FAIR AND AMBITIOUS Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 8 Papua New Guinea reported a net emission in 2015 of 15,193 Gg CO2 eq which is a significant increase from the -14,179 Gg CO2 eq reported for 200017. PNG, therefore, went from a net sink in 2000 to a net source in 2015. The increasing trend was due to the reduction of removals from the AFOLU sector which decreased from - 20,972 Gg CO2 eq in 2000 to 2,512 Gg CO2 eq in 2015, a decrease of 23,484 Gg CO2 eq18. The Energy sector also had an impact on this increasing trend where emissions increased from 6,274 Gg CO2 eq in 2000 to 11,806 Gg CO2 eq in 2015, an increase of 5,532 Gg CO2 eq19.

Within the AFOLU sector, the LULUCF sub- sector was one of the biggest contributors to GHG emission in PNG accounting for net emission of -21,654 Gg CO2 eq in 2000 and 1,716 Gg CO2 eq in 2015.20 Within the Energy sector, the Energy industries sub-sector was the biggest contributor which accounted to 1,023 Gg CO2 eq in 2000 and 4,128 Gg CO2 eq in 201521.

As such this Enhanced NDC Focuses on targets and actions within these two sectors specifically the LULUCF sub-sector and Energy Industries sub-sectors, while also noting opportunities for action within the transport sub-sector and a commitment to enhance ambition in the way that PNG collects and manages data within them and across all emitting sectors to allow for further refinement and enhancement of ambition within future updates.

Key targets within these areas include:

SUMMARY OF CONTRIBUTIONS INCLUDING SCOPE AND COVERAGE 17. Papua New Guineas First Biennial Update Report. (2019). 18. Papua New Guineas First Biennial Update Report. (2019). 19. Papua New Guineas First Biennial Update Report. (2019). 20. Papua New Guineas First Biennial Update Report. (2019). 21. Papua New Guineas First Biennial Update Report. (2019). Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 9 PNG is committing to a headline target of carbon neutrality within the energy industries sub-sector.

This will be achieved by:

Increasing levels of renewables in the energy mix for on-grid connection  through increasing the share of installed capacity of renewable energy from 30 percent in 2015 to 78 percent in 2030. The target of 100 percent renewable energy by 2030 in the previous NDC was revised due to the influence of liquefied natural gas (LNG) into the energy mix and existing agreements with Independent Power Producers that extend beyond 2030.

Reducing energy demand - through adoption and implementation of Minimum Energy Performance Standards and Labelling (MEPSL) Regulations as well as enhancing public awareness of energy use and means of reducing energy use.

Establishing a framework for fossil fuel emission offsetting  PNG remains committed to an energy transition but also recognizes that a full transition will take time given PNGs complex geographies and dispersed population as well as a growing economy. As such a framework for offsetting of emissions from fossil fuels will be introduced to support economic incentives for the transition while also helping to finance domestic nature- based solutions in particularly reduced emissions and enhanced removals from the forest sector.

Enhanced data collection  PNG will establish a framework for the enhanced data collection on energy use and associated emissions to support improved policy and regulation to manage emissions.

Also, PNG will continue to review appropriate options and approaches to reduce emissions from the transport sub-sector.

This will be achieved by a 25 percent reduction in both the area of annual deforestation and annual degradation against 2015 levels (equating to a reduction of 8,300 ha of annual deforestation and 43,300ha of degradation) as well as an increase in the areas of forest planted.

The enhanced NDC will focus on four (4) development sectors impacted by the nine (9) priority areas. The development sectors include agriculture, health, infrastructure, and transport which are in line with the development of the PNG National Adaptation Plan. The adaptation targets are measured against beneficiaries for the agriculture and health sectors, and the value and number of assets for the transport and infrastructure sector and are summarized below:

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 10 PAPUA NEW GUINEAS MITIGATION CONTRIBUTION 3 The energy sector is the largest net emitting sector in Papua New Guinea, emitting approximately 87.7 percent of the total emissions (excluding LULUCF) in 2015. The total emission from the energy sector in 2015 was 11,806 Gg CO2 eq, which was an increase of 5,532 Gg CO2 eq (88.2 percent) from 200022. The GHG makeup of the emissions sees CO2 as 68 percent of the total sector emissions, CH4 was 31 percent and N2O was 0.4 percent23. This increase in emissions was a result of an increase in economic activities in the country. To achieve the mitigation contributions in the energy sector, efforts will be directed towards the energy industries and transport sub-sectors that will build on existing policy directives of the implementing agencies.

Energy industries, manufacturing industries and construction account for 5,596 (47 percent) Gg CO2 eq in 201524 and include emissions from on and off- grid electricity generation and operation of the LNG plant. The on-grid generation that is managed by PNG Power Limited (a state-owned entity) and off- grid generation is from the minerals and agricultural industries that produce their own electricity.

The lack of access to reliable and clean energy is restricting economic development, affecting health, and constraining access to education, health and other services in rural areas. Development of renewable energy small to medium-sized enterprises (SME), such as small-scale solar power, can provide green livelihood alternatives to subsistence agriculture. Access to electricity or affordable renewable energies will improve the livelihood of women and young people in particular through decreased workloads, improved cooking, processing of food and Non-Timber Forest Products (NTFPs), increased safety and security from reliable lighting, engaging in home-based businesses and educational activities in the evenings, and reducing air pollution.

Other Sectors contributed 459Gg CO2 eq (4 percent) of the sectoral emissions in 201526, especially from the residential and commercial buildings. PNG does not have much experience with energy efficiency in the residential and commercial building sub-sector; hence the lack of energy efficiency measures to date or energy efficiency projects, which may generate a high return on investments. Thus, energy efficiency in PNG presents the potential for win- win results, reducing greenhouse gas emissions while at the same time providing financial returns via reduced power bills and improving health and economic opportunities for citizens.

Remaining emissions from the energy sector in 2015 came from fugitive emissions of oil and natural gas production which contributed 3,784 Gg CO2 eq (32 percent)27. Irrespective of PNGs efforts in reducing GHG emissions, PNG stands as a developing country and the economy relies on oil and natural gas production. Hence future GHG emissions are predicted to take place that potentially will come with the development of oil and natural gas production.

The GHG information presented above is reflective of quantitative data uncovered as a result of the BUR1 GHG inventory. Since PNG does not have a National Energy Balance table, the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) energy balance table was used to estimate emissions from the energy sector in the BUR1. While some of the data used to develop the APEC energy balance table were from actual sources in PNG, most of the information was based on estimates. Due to these uncertainties, it was decided not to include quantified GHG targets for the energy sector in this NDC. The appropriate technical and financial support will be necessary to build the capacity of relevant agencies to manage and analyze data to enable the setting of GHG targets in PNGs forthcoming NDCs.

22. Papua New Guinea First Biennial Update Report. (2019).

23. Papua New Guinea First Biennial Update Report. (2019).

24. Papua New Guinea First Biennial Update Report. (2019).

25. Papua New Guinea First Biennial Update Report. (2019).

26. Papua New Guinea First Biennial Update Report. (2019).

27. Papua New Guinea First Biennial Update Report. (2019).

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 11 PNG is committing to a headline target of carbon neutrality within the energy industries sub-sector. This will be achieved by:

Non - GHG Quantitative Targets As part of PNGs energy transition, the country is targeting a transition in its energy mix in the energy industries for the share of installed capacity of renewables from 30 percent in 2015 to 78 percent in 2030 for on-grid connection managed by PNG Power Limited. This target is conditional and based on the availability and timing of international support. The National Electricity Roll-Out Plan and PNG Power Limiteds 15-year power development plan were used to establish this target and will also be used to monitor the progress of this target.

This target represents a decrease from PNGs original target of 100 percent renewable by 2030. This revision is based on:

Enhanced information on existing and planned projects and the time lag to operationalize larger generation projects.

The expansion of PNGs LNG sector and its increased role in electricity generation  which while allowing for removal of or avoidance of higher emission energy sources from the grid do not present a renewable energy resource.

Non - GHG Action Based Targets 1. Reducing electricity demand through energy efficiency Performance Standards and Labelling (MEPSL) Regulations as well as enhancing public awareness of energy use and means of reducing energy use. In-depth work in the areas of building energy efficiencies such as evaluating the performance of installed air conditioning and refrigeration systems and developing recommendations to improve such systems as retrofits or in industrial energy- efficiency audits and retrofits will require financial and technical support. The draft MEPSL is intended to be fully implemented by 2030. Limited data on existing energy use and potential trends currently prohibits placing a quantified target on the impact of these actions.

2. Fossil fuel off-setting from the energy industries sub-sector through nature-based solutions PNG remains committed to an energy transition but also recognizes that a full transition will take time given PNGs complex geographies and dispersed population as well as a growing economy. As such, a framework for offsetting of emissions from fossil fuels will be introduced to support economic incentives for the transition while also helping to finance domestic nature-based solutions in particular, reduced emissions and enhanced removals from the forest sector.

3. Enhanced data collection PNG will establish a framework for enhanced data collection on energy use and associated emissions to support improved policy and regulation to manage emissions.

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 12 Papua New Guinea aims to further enhance its ambitions on taking action within the Energy sector. One of the areas is the transport subsector which aims to promote clean fuel technology regulations to set standards for the GHG emissions, and economic incentives for fuel-efficient vehicles. Actions from the transport subsector are contained in the National Transport Strategy, the Medium-Term Transport Plan II 2019-2022, National Energy Policy 2017-2027, and National Climate Compatible Development Management Policy but will need financial and technical support for them to be implemented by 2030. These measures include the following:

Reduce vehicle-miles through more compact development patterns;  Encourage the introduction of fuel-efficient transport equipment;

Encourage sustainable substitution of fossil fuels with biofuels;

Monitor vehicle fleet-weighted fuel and CO2 efficiency;  Eliminate high emission vehicles;

Establish low carbon fuel standards;

Encourage the introduction of hybrid and electric vehicles POTENTIAL ENERGY MEASURES ACHIEVING ENERGY INDUSTRIES SUB-SECTOR TARGETS The above targets are fully in line with existing national policy and strategy documents as well as industry action plans. Key strategies linked to these targets and central to their achievement include:

National Energy Policy 2017 - 2027  The National Electrification Roll-Out Plan  PNG Power 15 Year Power Development Plan  The Medium-Term Development Plan III Key Result Area 2: Goal 2.1  Papua New Guineas Sustainable Development Goal 13 Roadmap: The four key energy actions:

1) Carbon neutral gas and minerals sector 2) Renewable-based rural electrification 3) Resilient, reliable and efficient electricity grids 4) Energy-efficient government and private sector Several major programs are already being implemented that will contribute to achieving the targets, and they include:

PNG Electrification Programme  Pawarim Komuniti  PNG Off-grid Electrification Program  Town Electrification National Program (TEP)  Rural On-grid Electrification Program (ROGEP) The Climate Change (Management) Act 2015 is being reviewed to provide a stronger link between the energy sector and emissions reductions and to create a framework for improving energy data collection.

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 13 The Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) sub-sector is one of the biggest contributors to GHG emissions in PNG. Nevertheless, the sector also has the highest potential for removal. The sector has evolved into a smaller sink over time due to a decrease in forest lands. The net emissions from the LULUCF sector amounted to 1, 717 Gg CO2 eq in 2015 compared to -21, 636 Gg CO2 eq in 2000 which is a total decrease of removals amounting to 23,370 Gg CO2 eq28.

Most of the emissions in the sector occurred as a result of deforestation and forest degradation. Almost all deforestation was due to land-use conversion from forest land to cropland, in particular, subsistence agriculture (68.8 percent) and for oil palms plantation development (24.4 percent). Logging was the major driver of forest degradation, accounting for over 90 percent of the total degraded forest in PNG. Hence, the primary mitigation effort of the sector lies in reducing emission from deforestation and forest degradation due to commercial agriculture, subsistence agriculture and commercial logging.

Sustainable forest management practice is the cornerstone of the current forest policy in the management and utilization of the nations forest resources. This is now being strengthened by the approval of several national government policy instruments in 2020, including; the National Reforestation and Afforestation Strategies, National Strategies on Domestic Processing of Forest Produce, Revised PNG Logging Code of Practice 2nd Edition, and the PNG Timber Legality Standard. These policy instruments are crucial to facilitating orderly management and development of the forest resources, with the view of giving significant recognition to mitigate against climate change effects.

The REDD+ Finance and Investment Plan (RFIP) which is integral part of the NDC Implementation Plan identified areas within the AFOLU sector to mitigate GHG Emissions . The RFIP sets out the potential opportunities that scaling up actions in line with PNGs National REDD Strategy (NRS) could deliver. These include emissions reductions of more than 60 million tonnes of CO2e over the coming decade, while also delivering significant economic, social and environmental co-benefits. This information is intended to help inform decision makers and potential investors of the potential to deliver tangible returns from upfront investments in REDD+ in PNG.

Progress in the sector is influenced by the following: (i) coordinated planning on how forest land can be cleared and utilised in a sustainable manner;

(iii) effective support to rural development. Landholders and communities are in need of access to basic services and development opportunities. Many communities and landholders are faced with rapid transition into a global cash-based economy, without the appropriate awareness, skills, and support for sustainable management of resources. Hence, they are indirectly increasing the deforestation and degradation of the forest cover.

Achievement of proposed action areas in the enhanced NDC will be critical in helping transform the livelihoods of PNGs rural communities, safeguard biodiversity and progress PNG towards establishing a sustainable and climate smart economy capable of meeting the Sustainable Development Goals while also helping to deliver sustainable deforestation free agricultural commodities to international markets.

LAND USE, LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY SUB-SECTOR 28. Papua New Guinea First Biennial Update Report. (2019).

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 14 Papua New Guinea reported the GHG emissions in the LULUCF sub-sector from 2000 to 2015 in the countrys BUR1 in 201929. PNGs emissions in LULUCF sub-sector have been increasing steadily during the reporting period due to increases in deforestation and forest degradation caused predominantly by the expansion of agriculture and commercial logging. Actions noted within this NDC will transform this upward trend into a downward trend over the next 10 years (by 2030) as shown in Figure 4.

PNG will reduce the area of annual deforestation and annual degradation by 25 percent against 2015 levels (equating to a reduction of 8,300 ha or annual deforestation and 43,300ha of degradation), and increase the area of afforestation, reforestation, and ecosystem restoration. It will reduce 10,000 Gg CO2 eq of the net emission from the LULUCF sub- sector by 2030.

REDD+ activities such as enhancement of land use planning and monitoring, promoting climate-friendly agriculture, strengthened monitoring of FCA permits, enhancement of timber legality, and promoting reforestation and ecosystem restoration. PNG will continue improving the monitoring capacity of LULUCF sub-sector by enhancing its National Forest Monitoring System for more accurate monitoring of forest and land-use change, and assessment of GHG emissions in LULUCF sub-sector. The NDC targets and the activities in the LULUCF sector are listed in Table 2.

There were no emissions reduction targets set for the Agriculture sub-sector under the AFOLU sector due to unavailability of country-specific activity data and insignificant emission results. However, there is greater potential for livestock and agriculture development in the country; as such it will be a potential sector that will attract mitigation actions in the future.

The LULUCF GHG and Non-GHG targets are determined based on the sectors primary mitigation efforts as well as capacity needs to address the sectors monitoring capacity. There are options to improve monitoring and accounting to better address sustainable management of forests and conservation of forest carbon stocks but current data does not allow for this, which PNG would like to improve on in the near future.

29. Papua New Guineas first Biennial Update Report (2019) 30. PNG Forest Authority (2019) Forest and land use change in Papua New Guinea: 2000-2015 Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 15 Figure 5 PNGs annual GHG emissions and removals between 2001 and 2015, the future emissions prediction under the business as usual scenario and the NDC target from the LULUCF sub-sector.

By 2030, annual net emission from deforestation and forest degradation due to agriculture expansion and commercial logging is reduced by 10,000 Gg CO2 eq comparing to 2015 level.

LULUCF will be converted from net GHG source (1,716 Gg CO2 eq) in 2015 to net GHG sink (-8,284 Gg CO2 eq) by 2030 to mitigate emissions from other sectors.

Non-GHG Quantitative Targets  The area of annual deforestation is reduced by 25 percent of 2015 level by 2030 (Equating to a reduction of 8,300 ha of annual deforestation).

The area of forest degradation is reduced by 25 percent of 2015 level by 2030 (Equating to a reduction of 43,300 ha of annual degradation).

The area of planted forest and forest restoration is increased.

Non-GHG Actions Based Targets  Enhanced land use planning  Promoting climate-friendly agriculture  Enhancing community level agriculture productivity  Certification system for climate- friendly agriculture products  Enhancing value chain of climate- friendly agriculture products  Strengthened monitoring of FCA permits  Enhancement of timber legality  Promoting downstream processing  Promoting the Painim Graun Planim Diwai initiative and planting 10 million trees initiative.

Setting up detailed strategic action plans based on scientific and socio- economic analysis Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 16 Overarching target in LULUCF sector: PNG will shift the upward trend of GHG emission in the AFOLU sector due to the increase of deforestation and forest degradation to a downward trend in the next 10 years (by 2030).

By 2030, annual net emission from deforestation and forest degradation due to agriculture expansion and commercial logging is reduced by 10,000 Gg CO2 eq comparing to 2015 level.

Activities/actions on improving NDC monitoring:  Completing National Forest Inventory for;  More accurate emission factor;  More accurate post-disturbance forest growth;  A better understanding of biodiversity.

Re-vitalizing Permanent Sample Plot for;  Understanding the rate of carbon sequestration of regrowth forest;  More accurate post-disturbance forest growth;  Understanding the carbon sequestration of the primary forest;  A better understanding of forest recovery for better forestry planning and policymaking.

Degradation Alerts Monitoring System for PNG at relevant government institutions and agencies Non-GHG quantitative targets The area of annual deforestation is reduced by 25% of 2015 level by 2030 (Equating to a reduction of 8,300 ha of annual deforestation).

The area of forest degradation is reduced by 25% of 2015 level by 2030 (Equating to a reduction of 43,300 ha of annual degradation).

The area of planted forest and forest restoration is increased.

AFOLU will be converted from net GHG source (1,716 Gg CO2 eq) in 2015 to net GHG sink (- 8, 284 Gg CO2 eq) by 2030 to mitigate emissions from other sectors.

Enhancement of timber legality  Promoting REDD+  Promoting downstream processing  Promoting the Painim Graun Planim Diwai initiative and planting 10 million trees initiative.

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 17 Table 2 LULUCF Area of Influence POTENTIAL POLICIES AND MEASURES a) Strengthening Land Use & Development Planning The main drivers of emissions are forest degradation and deforestation (forest land converted to other land use). As logging was the main driver for 90 percent of forest degradation between 2011- 2015, strategies on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation and Enhancement of Carbon Stocks (REDD+) must be implemented effectively.

There is a rapid increase in land clearing for commercial agriculture due to the demand for investment in rural areas. This is supported by government policies that promote agricultural expansion for increasing food security and expanding agricultural exports. However, this does not link with actions to support staple food production within family agriculture or clear guidance on the environmental and social standards. The NRS, therefore, targets actions to strengthen food security and develop a sustainable commercial agriculture sector to be able to respond to changing international standards.

The Papua New Guinea National REDD+ Strategy (2017 - 2027), has identified priority areas and measures to achieve PNGs emissions reduction targets, it will require action that cuts across government sectors and stakeholder groups, at every level (National, Provincial, Local and Ward), which will not halt economic and social development but ensure responsible and sustainable development and deliver long term benefits to the people of PNG. The policies and measure needed that will address the direct and underlying drivers of forest cover change32 will be based on the following outlined;

32. Papua New Guinea National REDD+ Strategy (2017  2027). (2017).

33. Papua New Guinea National REDD+ Strategy (2017  2027). (2017).

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 18 PAPUA NEW GUINEAS ADAPTATION ACTIONS 4 Adaptation is a high priority due to the climate- related hazards that already pose significant risks to Papua New Guinea considered highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change.34 Addressing this high vulnerability to climate change involves a breadth of measures,35 to which adaptation is integral. PNGs Second NC describes the extremely exposed status of this island nation and its vulnerability to the negative impacts of climate change.

The countrys tropical climate is changing rapidly and exposure to climate change-related hazards such as inland flooding, coastal flooding, inland frosts and droughts, coastal erosion and inundation, soil salinization, and coral reef degradation have resulted in a severe toll to both the people of PNG and the national economy. Climate change is predicted to exacerbate some of these event-driven hazards and introduce new hazards due to gradual shifts in climatic conditions  most prominently, an increase in malaria penetration into the highlands changed agricultural yields and further damage to coral reefs. These event-driven hazards in turn cause damage to assets and infrastructures, destroy livelihoods, endanger cultural and ecological treasures, and kill or injure people.

The GoPNG, through the CCDA, has emphasized the significance of adaptation through its reporting on national projects and specific activities. CCDA also coordinates and monitors projects that support specific adaptation solutions that protect people against the risk of climate change. Adapting to the impacts of climate change is integral to PNG and, therefore, included in this NDC. Vulnerability and risk exposure to climate change impacts exacerbate human development challenges and social issues.

The last recorded total net GHG emissions for PNG were 15,193 Gg CO2 eq; tailored adaptation measures are necessary to adapt to this climate change influencing trend into the future.

PNG is one of the countries that mention loss and damage in terms of finances. According to a report by the United Nations Office of Disaster, USD 23 million was lost due to the severity and intensity of disasters occurring between 2005 and 2014. In terms of adaptation, a 2013 report by the Asian Development Bank revealed that the annual adaptation cost ranged between 0.14 percent -1.52 percent of the GDP. The economic cost to climate change is projected to reach 15.2 percent of GDP by 2100. Observation from investments made in climate change adaptation however has seen positive implications towards climate resilience.

The PNG National Disaster Centre launched the National Disaster Risk Reduction Framework (NDRRF) 2017-2030, in 2017, with the assistance of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). This framework comprises of four priority areas: i) Understanding Disaster Risk; ii) Strengthening Disaster Risk Governance to Manage Disaster Risk; iii) Investing in Disaster Risk Reduction for Resilience; and iv) Enhancing Disaster Preparedness for Effective Response and to Build Back Better in Recovery, Rehabilitation, and Reconstruction.

The addition of adaptation into this Enhanced NDC builds upon the initial NDC report by expanding on identified priority areas and including subsections on adaptation planning, defining adaptation targets and providing an overview of the implementation process.

35. Green Growth Potential Assessment. Papua New Guinea Country Report. (2019).

36. PNG GCF NAP Readiness Support Proposal. ( 2020) Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 19 Additionally, the Vision 2050, the Development Strategic Plan (DSP), the Strategy for the Responsible Development for PNG (STaRs), and the National Climate Compatible Development Management Policy (NCCDMP) set a strong foundation for adaptation planning. PNG takes an inclusive and responsible and sustainable development approach to adaptation planning guided by the 21 principles for inclusive green growth outlined in STaRs. The strategic focus of the GoPNG to address climate change adaptation is outlined in the Medium Term Development Plan (MTDP III) 2018- 2022 Goal 7 Key Result Area (KRA) 7.2, which is to adapt to the domestic impacts of climate change and contribute to global efforts to abate greenhouse gas emissions.

The Government has identified twelve overarching adaptation strategies to help meet its strategic adaptation focus. One of the strategies is to establish and strengthen national and sub-national climate change and development strategies, which the Government aims to achieve through the development of the PNG National Adaptation Plan (NAP). The NAP aims to advance effective adaptation planning with an overall objective to strengthen institutional and technical capacities and integrate climate change adaptation into national and sub-national planning and budgeting processes.

37. Papua New Guinea and the Green Climate Fund. Country Programme.(2020) Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 20 ADAPTATION NINE PRIORITY AREAS This subsection identifies PNGs priority actions in the face of climate challenges while interlinking them with the countrys key policy and strategy documents, verified through robust stakeholder engagement and national validation workshops.

Nine adaptation priority areas have been identified and prioritized in key national documents, including the Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC), the Climate Change Management Act of 2015, the National Communications, and the GCF Readiness Support for NAP Project for PNG, the CCDA Climate Change Corporate Plan, and the GCF PNG Country Programme.

The nine adaptation priority areas influence key priority development sectors and the linkages between them are summarized below.

1. Coastal Flooding and Sea Level Rise This priority area is linked to the transport, infrastructure, agriculture, urban development, natural resources and environment, and water and sanitation sectors.

This priority area is linked to the transport, infrastructure, agriculture, urban development, and water and sanitation sectors.

38. International Climate Change Adaptation Initiative. Pacific Climate Change Science Program. Current and Future Climate of Papua New Guinea. (2013).

40. Green Climate Fund Papua New Guinea Country Programme. (2020).

41. Green Climate Fund Papua New Guinea Country Programme. (2020).

42. Green Climate Fund Papua New Guinea Country Programme. (2020).

43. Impact of Climate Change on Agriculture in Papua New Guinea.(2018).

44. Green Climate Fund Papua New Guinea Country Programme. (2020).

45. National Adaptation Plan process in focus: Lessons from Papua New Guinea.(2018).

46. Green Climate Fund Papua New Guinea Country Programme. (2020).

47. UNFCCC PNG Second National Communication. (2014).

48. Green Climate Fund Papua New Guinea Country Programme. (2020).

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 21 3. Food Insecurity Variability in agricultural yields affects many of PNGs agricultural regions. The highland regions are particularly sensitive to variability in agricultural yields as a result of a change in climatic conditions. Sweet potato, coffee and cocoa are examples of climate- sensitive crops. Subsistence farmers are affected the most and may need to look for alternative crops.

This priority is linked to the agriculture sector. 4. Cities & Climate Change Papua New Guinea is experiencing an increase in rural to urban migration. Climate change exacerbates existing urban development challenges and vulnerabilities, such as poor health, inadequate housing, and lack of access to infrastructure, basic services and social safety nets. Urban areas on the coast are under threat of storm surge and sea-level rise, and, in PNG, cities are often located in hazard- prone areas in the coastal zone.49 50 This priority area is linked to the transport, infrastructure, health, urban development, and water and sanitation sectors.

5. Climate-Induced Migration This priority area is linked to the transport, health, education, urban development, and water and sanitation sectors.

49. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment: Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea. (2014).

50. Green Climate Fund Papua New Guinea Country Programme. (2020).

52. Green Climate Fund Papua New Guinea Country Programme. (2020).

53. Climate Change and Migration Issues in the Pacific. United Nations. (2014).

54. Environmental Refugees? A tale of two resettlement projects in coastal Papua New Guinea.(2017).

55. Green Climate Fund Papua New Guinea Country Programme. (2020).

56. PACCSAP Country Report. (2014). 58. International Climate Change Adaptation Initiative. Pacific Climate Change Science Program. Current and Future Climate of Papua New Guinea. (2013).

59. PACCSAP Country Report. (2014). 60. International Climate Change Adaptation Initiative. Pacific Climate Change Science Program. Current and Future Climate of Papua New Guinea. (2014).

61. Green Climate Fund Papua New Guinea Country Programme. (2014).

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 22 from coral reefs.62 Not only do the reefs contribute to livelihoods, but also protect the coastlines from storms and loss of land.

This priority area is linked to the transport, infrastructure, fisheries, agriculture, natural resources and environment, and water and sanitation sectors.

7. Malaria and Vector-borne Diseases Malaria in PNG is one of the top five health priorities presently challenging the health sector63. Malaria severely affects daily life in PNG, with 1.7m people infected every year. About 60 percent of the population lives in high-risk malaria regions. Once a disease found only in PNGs low-lying coastal regions, over the last 20 years climatic changes resulting in rising temperatures have worsened the effects of malaria with malaria vector mosquitoes carrying the malaria parasite establishing itself in the highlands where it was not previously present.64 Migration of malaria to densely populated highland regions with no immunity is a high risk to the community. Poor environmental health management, poor waste management and poor water and sanitation management provide an environment for increased and optimal breeding conditions for malaria parasites.

This priority area is linked to the health, water and sanitation sectors.

8. Water and Sanitation PNGs population is among those with the least access to safe water supply in the world. The GoPNGs Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) Policy 2015- 2030 indicates that 89 percent of people in urban areas and 33 percent in rural areas have access to safe water, while 57 percent of urban dwellers and only 13 percent of the rural population have access to basic sanitation.65 Climate change impacts from coastal and inland flooding and landslides risk increasing cases of malaria and vector-borne diseases, as well as contaminating drinking water.

This priority area is linked to the health, natural resources and environment, and water and sanitation sectors.

Triggered by increased rainfall intensity and land- use changes in the mountainous rural areas of PNG, landslides frequently cause damage to vital infrastructure, homes and gardens, and upland forests.66 PNG ranks 1st in global landslide hazard profiles, according to a World Bank Hotspot study. 67 In recent decades, landslides have caused considerable damage to road infrastructure and remote communities. Landslides have caused significant damage along the Highlands Highway, the sole lifeline for the highland communities and export businesses. Increases in rainfall and inland flooding as a result of climate change will increase the likelihood of landslide events.

Additional Priority Areas PNG has determined additional adaptation priority areas as part of the 2019-2020 regional and sectoral consultations of the Green Climate Fund Readiness Support projects identification of climate change and investment priorities for the PNG GCF Country Programme. The additional adaptation priorities are not recognized under the current Climate Change Management Act 2015. The additional adaptation priority areas include Forestry and Land- Use, Waste, Fisheries, Extractive industries, Biodiversity and Tourism/Cultural. These priority areas are linked to the agriculture, health, natural resources, and environment sector.

62. National Statistical Office, Port Moresby.(2014) 63. PNG Health Sector Strategic Priorities 2016  2021. (2017) 64. Reducing the risk of disasters and Climate Variability in the Pacific Islands: A PNG Country Assessment. ( 2014).

65. Papua New Guinea Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) Policy 2015-2030. (2015).

66. Climate Change Knowledge Portal for Development Practitioners and Policy Makers.(2020).

67. Green Climate Papua New Guinea Country Programme. (2020). Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 23 This subsection provides information on the key 1. Coastal flooding and sea-level rise 4. Cities and climate change.

Mangrove planting  Coastal defence structures  Coastal rehabilitation and relocation/resettlement  Climate risk and vulnerability assessments across five provinces (New Ireland, Oro, Madang, East Sepik and Morobe)  Climate risk, hazard and vulnerability assessments  Community-based flood simulation exercises  Early Warning System integration  Climate-Smart Agriculture Policy is socially inclusive  Progress on food security is underpinned by the National Food Security Policy 2016-2027  Scaling-up and replication of successful measures across coastlines country-wide  Climate-resilient physical planning standards and codes  No policy on climate-resilient infrastructure.  Scaling-up and replication country-wide  Hazard mapping  Soil stabilization  Climate-resilient planning physical planning standards and codes  Infrastructure and asset management plans  Action on low-emission transport options remain unsupported  Connecting farmers to markets in rural areas via climate- proofed infrastructure 68. National Constitution of Papua New Guinea. ( 1975) 69. UNDP Produce for Adaptation Planning/ NAP projects financed by the Green Climate Fund. (2020).

70. GCF PNG Country Programme. (2020).

Table 3 Summary of Supported and Unsupported Priority Area Adaptation Actions Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 24 5. Climate-induced migration 6. Damage to coral reefs. 7. Malaria and vector- borne diseases.  Project support has been received to create a more climate-resilient transport sector  Mangrove planting  Coral rehabilitation  Establishment of marine protected areas (MPAs), locally managed marine areas (LMMA)  Mangrove management  Marine awareness  Malaria is recognised as one of the top five 5 priority activities for the Department of Health  Action has been taken to destroy and reduce malaria- vector breeding  Environmental health management is under consideration  Climate Change Health Impact Policy is in draft  Greening of urban development plans  Relocation, resettlement, gender social inclusion assessments require exploration  Awareness-raising of impacts of climate change migration on customary land  Establishment of marine protected areas  Planting of seagrass  Replanting of coral coordination  Response measures for marine disposal  Protection and promotion of biodiversity conservation through ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) approaches.

Improve environmental health services.  Improve technology (i.e. bed nets). And distribution  Improve research on understanding impacts and responses  Apply Healthy Islands concept 71. Assessing the Evidence: Migration, Environment and Climate Change in Papua New Guinea. (2015).

72. Assessing the Evidence: Migration, Environment and Climate Change in Papua New Guinea. Geneva, Switzerland. (2015).

73. GCF PNG Country Programme. (2020). Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 25  Improve the Health Sectors ownership in managing malaria and vector-borne diseases  The WASH Policy recommends community health posts consisting of 30 facilities across PNG  The WASH Program Management Unit (PMU) has yet to drive implementation  Improvements in technological approaches  Improvements in water catchment  Desalination processes  Development of renewable energy initiatives to combat climate change-induced water insecurity74  Activities implemented under the WASH Policy need replication across all communities  Improvements to engineer designs  Implement geo-hazards assessments  Improvements in stormwater drainage  Reforestation and soil stabilization  Improving the waste sectors capacity through knowledge, training, research and response  Establishment of the Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) Policy 2015-2030  Identifying landslide risks using technology (GIS, LiDAR, and others)  Promote solid and chemical waste management at the national level  Municipal waste management planning  Special waste (plastic, e-wastes, bulky, mining, etc.) management planning  Household waste awareness  Community awareness and 8. Water and sanitation.

9. Landslides.

74. GCF PNG Country Programme. (2020).

75. Fifth National Report to the Convention on Biological Diversity. (2014).

76. Fifth National Report to the Convention on Biological Diversity. (2014).

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 26 projects to be climate-resilient.

Achieving PNGs adaptation goals requires the successful and timely implementation of adaptation actions, monitoring and regulation. Collective involvement of institutions creates the enabling environment to develop and implement effective adaptation policies. The NDC Implementation Plan provides guidance (see Annex 1).

1. Coastal flooding and sea-level rise Summary of Data Gaps Assessment Weather, atmosphere, ocean current, and tsunami early warning data and information from 4,000 Argo floats from the International Ocean Commission (IOC) project in the Pacific and PNG waters have been available since 2000. Furthermore Australian-funded sea level and climate monitoring from 1991 to 2020, has aided in determining land movements and sea-level changes; and the Comprehensive Hazards and Risk Management (CHARM) Framework for PNG and the Pacific Island States has contributed to planning and management of sea-level rise since 1992.

Promote the use of drone GIS mapping, artificial intelligence (AI) and internet of things (IoT) technology to mitigate flooding, both inland and islands.

Insurance and private sector support required  Early warning and forecasting to all communities in the country is required. There is presently a lack of information on disaster impacts on agriculture and water etc.

Disaster risk management in agriculture (agriculture insurance, probing an indemnity insurance framework, weather index setup, linking with multi- hazard early warning systems, etc.) is needed.

Table 4 Adaptation Nine Priority Areas Data Gaps Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 27  Need for research to develop climate-adaptive crops/food supply in the islands and hinterland  Application of Sustainable Land Use Policy in the country is needed  Monitoring and advice on ozone pollution, heat waves and bush fires in cities are needed.

Building codes introduced to mitigate climate change heat waves and cyclones is needed town development and planning in PNG  Lack of analysis of data and information on induced migration as a result of climate change  Articulation of induced migration drivers other than climate change to inform policymaking  LMMA only covering 159,259 hectares; this requires replication and scaling- up  Lack of tools/technology in the country to enable advancements in exploring desalination options  Lack of uptake and application of new technology for water resources in the country  There is a need to introduce large water reservoirs to all isolated provinces/ LLG The Geophysical Observatory of the Department of Mineral Policy and Geohazards Management (DMPGM) has seismographs located around the country which measure earthquakes continuously; the DMPGM also has linkages with the Rabaul Volcanological Observatory which monitors earth tremors leading to an eruption.

Data gaps exist however in the following area:

While the earthquake and volcanic data exist, there is no linkage to the occurrence of landslides. GIS and Remote Sensing Tools could be used to ensure connectivity and linkages between landslides and rainfall patterns and intensity.

4. Cities and climate change 5. Climate- induced migration 6. Damage to coral reefs 7. Malaria and vector-borne diseases 8. Water and sanitation Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 28 FOUR DEVELOPMENT SECTORS PNG conducted sector consultations to develop its NAP Readiness Support Proposal to the Green Climate Fund (GCF) in 2017 and 2019 and identified four key development sectors for the NAP to develop and implement. The four key development sectors are agriculture, health, transport and infrastructure. During 2019 and 2020, PNG conducted regional and sector consultations to review and re-affirm its national and sub-national priorities on climate change. The consultations agreed to prioritize the four key development sectors to address the nine adaptation priority areas (Table 4).

The PNG Enhanced NDC 2020-2030 will report on PNGs four priority development sectors for adaptation. Through the process of developing the NAP, PNG commits to strengthening institutional, technical, and financial capabilities and integration of climate change adaptation into planning and budgeting processes.

Table 5 NAP Development Sectors Matrix for the Nine Key Adaptation Priority Areas Priority Development Sector  Landslides  Forestry and land-use*  Waste*  Fisheries*  Biodiversity*  Damage to coral reefs  Climate-induced migration  Inland flooding  Cities and climate change  Landslides  Biodiversity*  Landslides  Waste*  Extractive industries*  Biodiversity* 77. Advancing Papua New Guineas National Adaptation Plan. (2020). 78. Advancing Papua New Guineas National Adaptation Plan. (2020). Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 29 PNG aims to broaden and sustain the scope of its NDC to include adaptation in the current and subsequent NDCs. This subsection establishes a technical approach to defining PNGs national adaptation targets.

PNG recognizes that the more comprehensively the NDCs are defined, the better the priorities can be integrated into development partner operations and support programs.

The approach for defining PNGs adaptation targets was undertaken by conducting a series of surveys and workshops which included sub-national and sector vulnerability and adaptation assessments, data collection, and multi-criteria analysis. The adaptation targets are measured against beneficiaries for the agriculture and health sectors, and the value and number of assets for the transport and infrastructure sector. The adaptation targets for the four NAP development sector are provided in Table 6.

Table 6 Adaptation Targets Priority Development Sector per the NAP 10% of the total population (0.8 million beneficiaries (25% are women)) have increased resilience with respect to food and water security, health and well- being in PNG.

100% of the population benefits from improved health measures to respond to malaria and other climate-sensitive diseases in PNG.

US$1.2b (PGK 4.2b) value of transport (air, sea, and land) infrastructure and assets built/rehabilitated according to climate-resilient codes and standards.

6 million people (70% of the population) benefit from improved early warning systems/information to respond to extreme climate events.

US$172m (PGK 608m) value of building and utility infrastructure assets built/ rehabilitated according to climate-resilient codes and standards.

IMPLEMENTATION OF ADAPTATION TARGETS Section 4 of the NDC Implementation Plan (Annex) outlines PNGs Implementation Plan on adaptation). The Implementation Plan sets out the strategic adaptation outcomes that will be achieved by Governments twelve overarching adaptation strategies and objectives. The development of the NAP is one of the Governments key objectives, which will ultimately direct the implementation and delivery of PNGs adaptation actions.

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 30 The projects and programs in the Implementation Plan outline the financial resources needed for implementation.

Technology transfer and capacity development cannot take place without sufficient financial resources made available to meet the targets. As a Small Island Developing State that is vulnerable to the impact of climate change, it is important to find the right balance in building the countrys resilience, and implementing the necessary adaptation and mitigation measures, while supporting the day to day needs of the country.

Implementing the proposed actions could deliver significant emissions reductions that could be monetised through results based payments under a range of mechanisms including the Green Climate Fund, bilateral, market or non-market mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement and PNG is looking forward to enforcement of the Article 6 on the ground.

MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION 5 Papua New Guinea is fully committed to taking action on climate change. The targets identified within the NDC are fully in line with existing policy documents and commitments. As such the GoPNG will take a central role within the implementation of proposed actions while also working to create a positive environment for private sector investment and partnerships with other parties to the convention.

To commit to reducing GHG emission levels and to increase climate resilience, PNG will require the appropriate financial support, technology, capacity building, and a good means of coordination to drive the implementation of the Nationally Determined Contributions, as outlined in the implementation plan.

PNGs NDC Implementation Plan is a living document and will be updated annually. It is annexed to the NDC and lists key actions and activities, and the respective resource requirements for each to ensure successful implementation.

INFORMATION ON TECHNOLOGY A Technology Needs Assessment (TNA) must be conducted (if not yet carried out), which will clearly set out the specific needs of the identified sectors .

A TNA for the NDC needs to be carried out with relevant stakeholders at the national level. The TNA ought to be gender-responsive and should consider the local context.

INFORMATION ON CAPACITY BUILDING As a SIDS, Papua New Guinea is faced with many challenges, including limitations on resources. PNGs economic growth and development are centered on institutional capacity building. GoPNG welcomes the support from development partners in areas of research and sectoral actions outlined in this Implementation Plan annexed to the NDC.

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 31 Women in Papua New Guinea tend to rank well below men in almost all measures of health, education, employment, access to economic resources, and political voice. They make extensive use of forest resources for food, fuelwood, medicine and handicrafts. Resource use is gendered in that in most PNG societies women have use rights to cultivate the land, gather forest products and to fish for or collect marine and riverine resources. Regardless of whether they are members of matrilineal or patrilineal societies, women cannot enforce rights to land and property nor claim income from cash crops or land leases such as for mining, logging and infrastructure construction.79 Subsistence agriculture in the informal economy supports 80 percent of the PNG population, a sector dominated by women80 (DPNM, 2020). Women are particularly vulnerable to climate change impacts due to reliance on natural resources for their livelihoods and household well- being, lack of access to land, income, credit and other resources.

Sixty percent of PNGs population is under 25 years old, and they have limited education and employment opportunities. They are involved in environmental efforts at the local level, both through local Youth Councils that are linked to the National Youth Commission, as well as in non-governmental activities in conservation, tree planting, and other forms of environmental activism. It is important to ensure that youth have the resources and opportunities they need to develop low-carbon, environmentally sustainable businesses. They also need support in their environmental conservation activities such as tree planting and forest management.

Given the importance of sustainable development of these resources, it will be important to work with local communities, youth and women to implement sustainable agricultural and agroforestry practices. Potential approaches include promoting socially- inclusive climate-friendly agriculture; promoting womens access to resources, information, and climate-smart technologies; enhancing the role of women and youth in agricultural value chains; and promoting inclusive forest rehabilitation and timber management.

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 32 80. Papua New Guinea Department of National Planning and Monitoring. (2020).

81. United Nations Industrial Development Organization and United Nations Women (2014).

82. Papua New Guinea Country Gender Assessment. (2012) 83. Country gender assessment of agriculture and the rural sector in Papua New Guinea. (2019) Subsistence agriculture in the informal economy supports 80 percent of the PNG population, a sector dominated by women84. According to the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), more than 50 percent of the female labour force in Papua New Guinea is engaged in agriculture, and women comprise nearly 35 percent of the economically active population in the sector. Rural women play a prominent role in subsistence food production, agricultural value chains and rural livelihoods. They actively participate in livestock and poultry production and in fish farming and sell surplus produce to generate income for the household.85 Increasing rates of migration to urban centres by young people86, the movement of men to the logging and extraction industries for employment, and womens consistent exclusion from employment in these sectors (FAO, 2019), mean that women will continue to make up at least half of agricultural producers in the country. Women are also responsible for family and child health, including water and sanitation management.

Actions should also take into account the gender digital gap and differing access rates of youth and remote communities to information and early warning systems (see GSMA, 2020 and Mehrabi et al, 2020).

84. Papua New Guinea Voluntario National Review. (2020) 85. Country gender assessment of agriculture and the rural sector in Papua New Guinea. (2019) 86. Papua New Guinea Voluntario National Review. (2020) Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 33 Australian Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO. (2011). Climate Change in the Pacific. Scientific Assessment and New Research. Volume 1: Regional Overview.

Australian Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO. (2011). Climate Change in the Pacific. Scientific Assessment and New Research. Volume 2. Country Reports.

Bourke, RM. (2018). Impact of Climate Change on Agriculture in Papua New Guinea.

Campbell, J., and Warrick, O. (2014). Climate Change and Migration Issues in the Pacific.

Connell, J., and Lutkehaus, N. (2017). Environmental Refugees? A tale of two resettlement projects in coastal Papua New Guinea.

FAO. (2019). Country gender assessment of agriculture and the rural sector in Papua New Guinea. Port Moresby.

Government of Papua New Guinea. (2009). Papua New Guinea Vision 2050. Port Moresby: Government Printing Office.

Government of Papua New Guinea. (2020). Papua New Guineas Sustainable Development Goal 13 Roadmap. 30 by 30 Report. Port Moresby; Climate Change and Development Authority.

Government of Papua New Guinea. (2016). 2016 National Determined Contribution.

GSMA Connected Women. (2020). The Mobile Gender Gap Report 2020. London: GSMA.

Huyer, S. and K. Freeman. (2020). Integration of gender equality and youth meaningful engagement considerations in the revision of Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). UNDP: Port Moresby.

International Organization of Migration. (2015). Assessing the Evidence: Migration, Environment and Climate Change in Papua New Guinea.

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 34 Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat, DNPM, CCDA. (2019). Options for Strengthening Climate Finance Coordination and Accessibility in Papua New Guinea.

Papua New Guinea National Council of Women (NCW). (2010). CEDAW Shadow report on the status of Women in Papua New Guinea and the Autonomous Region of Bougainville. Port Moresby, PNG.

Papua New Guinea Climate Change and Development Authority. (2017). Papua New Guineas National REDD+ Forest Reference Level - Modified Submission for UNFCCC Technical Assessment in 2017. Port Moresby: Climate Change and Development Authority.

Papua New Guinea Office of Climate Change and Development. (2014). National Climate Compatible Development Management Policy. Port Moresby: Office of Climate Change and Development.

Papua New Guinea Climate Change and Development Authority. (2017). National REDD+ Strategy2017-2027. Port Moresby: Climate Change and Development Authority.

Papua New Guinea Climate Change and Development Authority. (2019.) Papua New Guinea First Biennial Update Report to the UNFCCC. Port Moresby: Climate Change and Development Authority.

Papua New Guinea Climate Change and Development Authority. (2020). Papua New Guinea and the Green Climate Fund. Country Programme.

Papua New Guinea Climate Change and Development Authority. (2015). Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution. Port Moresby: Climate Change and Development Authority.

Papua New Guinea Climate Change and Development Authority. (2020). Papua New Guineas Sustainable Development Goal 13 Roadmap. Port Moresby: Climate Change and Development Authority.

Papua New Guinea Climate Change and Development Authority. (2020). REDD+ Investment Finance and Investment Prospectus (RFIP). Port Moresby: Climate Change and Development Authority.

Papua New Guinea National Department of Health. (2014). National Malaria Strategic Plan 2014  2018.

Papua New Guinea Department of Health. (2016). Health Sector Strategic Priorities 2016  2018.

Papua New Guinea Department of National Planning and Monitoring. (2015). Papua New Guinea Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) Policy 2015-2030.

Papua New Guinea Department of National Planning and Monitoring. (2018). Papua New Guinea Medium Term Development Plan 2018-2022. Port Moresby: Department of National Planning and Monitoring.

Papua New Guinea Department of National Planning and Monitoring. (2010). Papua New Guinea Development Strategic Plan 2010-2030. Port Moresby: Department of National Planning and Monitoring.

Papua New Guinea Department of National Planning and Monitoring. (2020). Papua New Guineas Voluntario National Review 2020 - Progress of Implementing the Sustainable Development Goals. Port Moresby, PNG: Department of National Planning and Monitoring.

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 35 Papua New Guinea Department of Petroleum and Energy. (2018). National Electricity Roll-Out Plan. Port Moresby: Department of Petroleum and Energy.

Papua New Guinea Department of Public Enterprises and Department Of Petroleum and Energy. (2017). National Energy Policy 2017-2027. Port Moresby: Department of Public Enterprises and Department of Petroleum and Energy.

Papua New Guinea Department of Transport. (2013). National Transport Strategy. Port Moresby: Department of Transport.

Papua New Guinea Forest Authority. (2019). Forest and Land Use Change in Papua New Guinea 2000-2015. PNG Forest Authority. Port Moresby.

Papua New Guinea National Statistical Office (2013). National Population and Housing 2011. Port Moresby: National Statistical Office. Stevens, H. (2016). Urban Life, Internal Migration and Development: The Need to Re-Address Internal Migration as a Positive Nexus for Growth and Development in Papua New Guinea.

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. (2015). Education for All 2000-2015: Achievements and challenges. Paris: UNESCO.

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. (2018). Pocket Guide to NDCs Under the UNFCCC.

UN-HABITAT. (2014). Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment: Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea.

World Bank. (2020). Climate Change Knowledge Portal for Development Practitioners and Policy Makers.

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 36 The development and production of PNGs NDC has been led by the Climate Change and Development Authority (CCDA) through its Measurement, Reporting and Verification and National Communications Division. This product is a result of extensive consultations with stakeholders from the relevant government agencies, civil society institutions and the private sector. Its development was made possible by the strong contributions of the members of Inter-agency Sub-Technical Technical Working Groups on AFOLU, Energy and Adaptation. Special thanks also go to a number of development partners including the NDC Partnership, UNDPs Climate Promise, FAO, Global Green Growth Institute (GGGI), UNEP, Regional Pacific NDC Hub composed of GIZ, SPC, SPREP and GGGI, German Development Corporation implemented by GIZ, UK Government, New Zealand Government, Government of Australia, USAID Climate Ready, and IRENA for invaluable support in the development of this product.

It should be noted that the views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the supporting partners.

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 37 Papua New Guinea NDC Implementation Plan 2021 - 2030 (A Living Document) Annex to PNGs Nationally Determined Contributions:

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 39 This Implementation Plan outlines the mitigation actions/activities that will be undertaken to achieve the emission reduction targets in the AFOLU and Energy Sectors, and the priority measures for Adaptation that have been listed in PNGs NDC. The targets, as provided in the NDC, are summarized below:

AFOLU: PNG aims to reduce an estimated emission of 10,000 GgCO2eq by 2030 from deforestation and forest degradation due to commercial agriculture expansion and commercial logging.

Energy: PNG will work towards a carbon neutral energy industries sub-sector by 2030  Adaptation: to identify and implement adaptation actions aimed at reducing vulnerability and building climate resilience across different parts of the country.

In determining the necessary actions to be taken, the Sub-Technical Working Groups (STWGs) identified existing national policies, strategies and plans, and developed the measures to ensure alignment with these existing efforts. A detailed narration is contained in the NDC.

OVERVIEW OF THE IMPLEMENTATION PLAN The Implementation Plan seeks to address the five key modules: Mitigation; Adaptation; Governance; Measurement, Reporting, and Verification (MRV); and finance. These are set out in Implementation Schedules below. Elements of the Finance module have been incorporated into each of the other four modules.

The Implementation Schedules are designed to clearly outline the activities, and their respective operational elements to guide implementation. The Implementation Schedules set out the following information, as they relate to the specific reported sector targets:

the activity/action that will be introduced, or enhanced, relative to the established target;  the indicators that will be used to track progress during implementation, and for monitoring and evaluation;

listing of the lead and supporting government agencies;

timeframes, including the start/end dates for each of the activities; and  the budget estimates for each activity, and sources of funding, including potential sources of funding.

The Climate Change & Development Authority (CCDA) as the mandated authority responsible for coordination of climate change initiatives of the Government, and acting as the focal point to the UNFCCC, will collaborate with key stakeholders to ensure fulfillment of the implementation plan.

The implementation plan will be supported with an Intra-Governmental Memorandum of Understanding on the Implementation of PNGs Nationally Determined Contribution (MOU) that will, among other things, formalize the commitment of the implementing agencies and establish a platform for dialogue. Further activities identified include a review of the existing and legislative and regulatory framework to support the mitigation and adaptation targets.

In order to monitor implementation of the activities listed in the Implementation Schedules, the mechanism for monitoring will be based on the MRV Framework. The Implementation Plan obligates the implementing agencies to furnish regular reports; and a final evaluation report due in 2024.

PLANNING PROCESS This Implementation Plan was developed in tandem with the NDC, using the following process:

1. Identifying team leads within CCDA, who were responsible for the gathering of data through the Technical Working Groups in the two mitigation reporting sectors (AFOLU and Energy), and adaptation;

2. Review and analysis of the data;

3. Determination of mitigation and adaptation targets in the NDC; 5. Validation workshop with key stakeholders.

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 40 .

2025.

.

.

Existing :

e.

G FA in 2020.

G FA.

.

.

C .

.

l.

(TLVS).

l.

Existing :

Existing :

r.

.

.

n.

Existing :

Existing :

Existing :

Existing :

Existing :

s.

s.

.

s.

s.

Existing :

Existing :

The governance and MRV actions and activities will be pursued to develop the necessary regulatory and legal infrastructure to support the NDC implementation, and to build institutional capacity, to among other things, enhance MRV capabilities. The Climate Change and Development Authority (CCDA) is mandated under the Climate Change (Management) Act 2015 with the responsibility to contribute toward global efforts in mitigating greenhouse gas emissions, through low carbon development that fosters economic growth and social welfare for the peoples wellbeing and prosperity. The agency is the National Designated Authority that coordinates all climate change related matters in PNG as well as the focal point to the UNFCCC. CCDA works in collaboration with line agencies with an objective to provide a coordination mechanism at the national level.

Technical Working Committee;

- Ensures relevant MRV data needs are conveyed with the appropriate government agencies - Review and amend the Implementation Plan as deemed necessary Government Ministerial Committee; - Provide high level policy guidance - Highlight, approve updates on the roadmap Central Agencies Coordinating Committee National Executive Council (NEC) Minister of Climate Change Climate Change and Development Authority Key Stakeholders Government, Private Sector and NGOs Adaption Sub-technical Working Committee Key Stakeholders Key Stakeholders AFOLU Sub-technical Working Committee Energy Sub-technical Working Committee AFOLU Sector Lead Energy Sector Lead PNG National NDC Focal Point NDC Key Development Partners Figure 1. Institutional Arrangement The Implementation Plan Roadmap the will be developed by March 2021 will detail the Implementation Schedule of each activity in this Implementation Plan.

Papua New Guineas Nationally Determined Contribution 52 Monitoring and evaluation Implementation will be monitored and evaluated based on the MRV framework. The table below describes the specific intervals of the reporting periods, and the institutions required to reporting.

A biennial update report shall be submitted by implementing government agencies and/or development partners supporting the implementation of these actions. These are submitted to CCDA, who will then be responsible to compile these status updates into a bi-annual progress report to be shared with stakeholders and an annual report submitted to Cabinet Ministers. At the end of the implementation period for the NDC Implementation Plan 2021-2030, a final evaluation report should be prepared by CCDA.

Action Timing Responsible agencies Progress report Bi-annual CCDA, implementing agencies, and stakeholders.

Annual report By December 2021, CCDA, implementing agencies, December 2022 and and stakeholders. December 2023.

Interim Evaluation Report January 2024 CCDA, implementing agencies, and stakeholders.

