The Government of Saint Lucia would like to acknowledge the Nationally Determined Contribution Partnership for supporting the review of its NDC, through the Climate Action Enhancement Package. The notable support of the Global Green Growth Institute, Climate Analytics, World Resource Institute and the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States Commission as the implementing partners must also be acknowledged; along with the contribution from the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Regional Coordinating Centre and the broad group of stakeholders  both public and private - who actively participated in many consultations. The development of Saint Lucias Updated 2020 NDC was led by the Department of Sustainable Development of the Ministry of Education, Innovation, Gender Relations and Sustainable Development.

Pursuant to Article 4 of the Paris Agreement, and in line with Saint Lucias commitment to limiting the global average temperature increase to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, Saint Lucias updated nationally determined contribution (NDC) reflects an increase in ambition, in mitigation, adaptation and loss and damage. For this updated NDC, Saint Lucia has used the guidance on information to provide clarity, transparency and understanding in Decision 4/CMA.1.

Despite the challenges that have been faced by the COVID-19 global pandemic, Saint Lucia, a small island developing state (SIDS), developed its NDC in a participatory, cross-sectoral and robust manner, building on sound inventories, data and ongoing processes.

As a SIDS, Saint Lucia is disproportionately vulnerable to external economic shocks and extreme climatic events that can instantly erase years, if not decades of development gains. Saint Lucia is also facing significant capacity constraints, limited fiscal space and insufficient domestic finance to respond adequately to challenges posed by climate change. This has been compounded by the economic fallout of the COVID- 19 global pandemic and exacerbating the already existing high debt to GDP ratio. While national efforts are underway and will continue to be exerted toward emissions reduction and building resilience, Saint Lucias national efforts alone will not be sufficient for achieving the goals of the NDC in mitigation, adaptation and loss and damage and securing the long-term sustainable development of Saint Lucia. As such, and in accordance with the obligation of developed countries under the UNFCCC Convention and the Articles of the Paris Agreement, Saint Lucia anticipates implementing the NDC through access to financial and technological multilateral and bilateral support. These funds will be used to leverage the limited national resources and national and regional technical capacities that are available.

The total indicative cumulative investment costs to achieve the mitigation targets by 2030 are expected to be in the order of USD $368 million (at 2020 prices). Investment costs refer to the total capital finance required to implement the mitigation actions that is incremental to baseline expenditures. The indicative costs were calculated considering the capital costs of any operation and maintenance, fuel expenses, or the energy savings associated with implementing measures.

In line with these efforts and to make concrete effort to implement Saint Lucias NDC, Saint Lucia has developed an Implementation Plan and a Financing Strategy for the NDC, building upon the existing NDC Partnership Plan.

In submitting this NDC, Saint Lucia, as a small emitter of greenhouse gases, supports the call on all Parties to make their submissions, to ensure that their NDCs are in keeping with their contributions to global emissions and to their respective responsibilities under the Convention and to take actions that will result in the restriction of global temperature increase to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels.

Saint Lucias greenhouse gas emissions are minuscule in global terms, with the country having contributed approximately 0.0015% of global emissions in 2016 at a per capita rate of 3.88 tCO2-eq. Notwithstanding this low contribution to the climate change phenomenon, the country is committed to global efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to levels, which will restrict global temperature increase to well below 1.5C above pre industrial levels.

AFOLU sector in its NDCs.

Saint Lucia is planning to develop a Long-Term Strategy (LTS), and the energy modeling timeframe extending to 2050 that informs this energy-focused NDC, is aligned with the long-term pathway for this sector. Stakeholder engagement on the LTS should generate buy-in for a decarbonization pathway that is operationalized in successive NDCs, while at the same time, allowing for a better understanding of the big-picture context in which the NDCs are developed. An LTS will also consider all sectors that contribute to greenhouse emissions. Early and detailed thinking about a long-term strategy will avoid potential pitfalls of technology and policy choices that may appear promising in the short-term, but can make achieving long-term goals more difficult. An especially valuable aspect of long-term planning is the signal sent to the private sector and to external investors that a framework is in place to support transformative interventions that simultaneously inform the projects outlined in five-year NDC cycles.

The Government of Saint Lucia has decided to include an Adaptation component as part of this mitigation- focused NDC to demonstrate its commitment to achieve the targets of the Paris Agreement as well as having in place better mechanisms for the adaptation to climate change impacts. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), adaptation and mitigation can be understood as complementary components of countries response to climate change and adaptation generates larger benefits to small islands when delivered in conjunction with other development activities.

The island of Saint Lucia is vulnerable to climate change due to:

1. Its small geographical area, which accounts for the fact that disasters take countrywide proportions. 2. Its location in one of the highest-risk areas of the planet. These risks include hurricanes (being situated in the tropical cyclone belt), storm surges, sea level rise and non-climate-related risks such as high volcanic and seismic activity.

3. Its dependence on a few sources of income (agriculture and tourism sectors) for a substantial part of its Gross Domestic Product (GDP).

Since the establishment of the National Adaptation Plan process at COP 16 in 2010 and considering that Saint Lucia is prone to higher risks from climate change impacts, the Government of Saint Lucia developed Saint Lucias National Adaptation Plan (hereinafter referred only as NAP), the drafting of which started after the submission of the first NDC in 2015. The NAP has been defined as a 10-year process, starting in 2018 with an expected full implementation by 2028. It is accompanied by Sectoral Adaptation Strategy and Action Plans (SASAPs) as described below.

Saint Lucia is in the process of exploring a national REDD+ program and is implementing efforts to maintain its current forest cover, as well as undertaking efforts to protect watersheds by forest protection measures.

Due to ongoing negotiations on Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, and the related uncertainties around double counting emissions reductions, Saint Lucia is not including forest sink capacity targets in this NDC revision. Saint Lucia will continue to look at challenges and opportunities in the sector, including capacity building, for a future inclusion of the forest and AFOLU sector in its NDCs.

The cost of inaction on climate change in Saint Lucia has been calculated to be at 12.1% of GDP by 2025, rising to 24.5% by 2050 and 49.1% by 2100. These numbers were calculated well before 2020 when the COVID-19 global pandemic disrupted economies worldwide. This pandemic also affected Saint Lucias overall economy, as the tourism sector, the largest revenue generating sector on the island, linked directly and indirectly to a number of sectors and livelihoods, was paralyzed for several months and remains so to some extent. While the long-term economic impacts of the pandemic are not yet known, the crisis has highlighted the extreme fragility of economies and development gains in tourism-based import-dependent SIDS such as Saint Lucia.

Considering the facts mentioned above, and as part of the NAP process, Saint Lucia has committed to prioritising crosssectoral and sectoral adaptation measures for eight key sectors/thematic areas and a segment on the limits to adaptation. The NAP is complemented, incrementally, with SASAPs. Priority sectors for adaptation action include: Tourism; Water; Agriculture; Fisheries; Infrastructure and spatial planning; Resilient Ecosystems; Education; and Health. SASAPs have already been developed for the Agriculture, Fisheries and Water sectors, as well as for Resilient Ecosystems (marine and terrestrial). Other key sectors and additional or new information will be identified and included through a cyclical, iterative NAP process. The NAP also considers a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan as part of the process, which aims to track progress on the actions and projects mentioned in the NAP and SASAPs.

Another essential component of the NAP process is the financing of the adaptation measures to be implemented. Saint Lucia currently has in place a Climate Financing Strategy under the NAP, which considers different sources of financing such as Domestic Public Resources, International Public Finance, and Domestic and International Private Finance. Consistent with the NAP process, the NAP Climate Financing Strategy is an ongoing and iterative process that would regularly evaluate funding needs and opportunities and would develop project or programme concepts to implement and assess the progress and impacts of these measures. It should be noted that Saint Lucia, as a SIDS, has very limited resources and is expected to mobilise a significant amount of international technical and financial resources to address climate change.

Consequently, substantial international support will be needed to achieve the adaptation and mitigation activities proposed in this NDC.

While adaptation is key to reducing risks and impacts of climate change, including nature-based solutions, lack of ambition in mitigating climate change at the global level may result in a number of limits to efforts undertaken by Saint Lucia. These include the inability of coastal ecosystems to adapt to increased rates and extent of sea level rise; insufficient financial resources to implement required adaptation strategies; and lack of effective or affordable technologies to provide coastal protection from impending sea level rise and extreme events. In Saint Lucia, these limits are categorized as biophysical, economic, technological, institutional, and social and cultural limits. These limits to adaptation may result in loss and damage, that is, impacts of climate change that occur despite the best mitigation and adaptation efforts.

Saint Lucia is also committed to ensuring that Action for Climate Empowerment (ACE) becomes, as per Article 12 of the Paris Agreement, a key cross-cutting instrument to involve all levels of society in climate action, in particular most vulnerable groups (including children, youth, the elderly and people living with disabilities) in support of all elements of mitigation and adaptation. ACE has the potential to provide the social and political will for action, in addition to the scientific and technological know-how. As such, the countrys ACE commitments, as non-GHG targets, will help accelerate the achievement of the NDC.

Loss and Damage is addressed under Article 8 paragraph 1 of the Paris Agreement, recognizing the importance that parties should give to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change. This includes extreme weather events and slow onset events; without ambitious global mitigation, there is also increased potential for both economic and non-economic loss and damage in Saint Lucia.

As detailed in Saint Lucias NAP, all priority sectors are at risk of experiencing loss and damage as a result of increased climate impacts and limits to the ability to adapt to them. Potential loss and damage will result from storm surges and salt water intrusion into freshwater supplies and agricultural land, frequent flooding and water shortages, which would lead to decreased food availability and security as well as permanent loss of territory due to sea level rise. Rising water temperatures and sea water CO2 concentration will result in damage to coral reefs and declines in commercially important fisheries stocks, as well as impact tourism, which is dependent on these ecosystems. Sea level rise and increased extreme climatic events will also result in loss of culturally and spiritually important landscapes and ultimately migration and displacement of coastal communities. Temperature increase will directly result in increased risk of deaths and injuries associated with extreme events, and indirectly through increased water borne and vector borne disease outbreaks.

Addressing the increased risk of significant levels of loss and damage due to climate change requires international support to implement a range of comprehensive risk management strategies, including improvement and / or creation of open sources of data to more effectively assess rising climate risks1. Such strategies include expanding livelihood protection policies that assist vulnerable, low-income individuals to recover from damages associated with extreme weather events; establishing contingency funds for climate impacts with flexible and rapid dispersal systems; providing support and protection for internally displaced persons, persons displaced across borders and host communities; providing support for the preservation or reestablishment of non-economic values that may be damaged during human mobility or otherwise.

As climate risks increase, existing and potential risk transfer mechanisms to address loss and damage, such as continued membership in the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility, may lead to a rise in costs beyond the capacity of the national budget. As such, international support to meet the rising costs of addressing loss and damage with such risk transfer mechanisms would be necessary.

1 Saint Lucias Cabinet-endorsed Climate Change Research Policy and Strategy lay out the Government of Saint Lucias efforts to enhance and promote collaboration on climate change-relevant research in the country by providing the necessary guidance for research partners to plan and undertake disciplinary, interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary fit- for-purpose studies to contribute to sound decision-making and climate action, including on the topics of adaptation, mitigation and loss and damage.

(MTDS) 2020-2023.

Saint Lucias sustainable development agenda emphasizes People, Planet, Prosperity, Peace and Partnership with seven (7) strategic development pillars to support socio-economic growth aspirations that are all intrinsically linked to Saint Lucias climate change priorities.

Saint Lucias overarching environmental priority remains, as addressing the adverse effects of climate change, which impacts and cuts across every area and sector that contributes to Saint Lucias sustainable development. While Saint Lucia has made many advances towards the SDGs, the impacts of climate change;

Accelerated Modalities of Action (S.A.M.O.A.) Pathway.

Adaptation for environmental sustainability, climate change and disaster vulnerability reduction1 SDG 1: End Poverty SDG 2: Zero Hunger SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities SDG 12: Responsible Consumption SDG 13: Climate Action SDG 14: Life Below Water SDG 15: Life on Land SDG 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth SDG 9: Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure SDG 4: Quality Education SDG 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth SDG 10: Reduced Inequalities SDG 7: Affordable and Clean Energy SDG 9: Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities SDG 12: Responsible Consumption Improving health and wellness SDG 2: Zero Hunger SDG 3: Good Health and Well Being for All People SDG 1: End Poverty SDG 4: Quality Education SDG 5: Gender Equality SDG 2: Zero Hunger During Saint Lucias 2019 Voluntary National Review (VNR) on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development under the United Nations High Level Political Forum (HLPF), the progress made and the challenges faced in implementing the SDGs under review at the 2019 HLPF VNR were highlighted.

As it relates to the Paris Agreement, Saint Lucias VNR report submitted and the national presentation provided, highlighted additional detail on progress made and challenges faced in implementing SDG 13:

Climate Action and SDG 7: Affordable and Clean Energy. Through the implementation of the NDC, Saint Lucia is committed to ensuring SDG co-benefits and will report against those through the established processes under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

In line with Saint Lucias commitment to SDG 5: Gender Equality, Saint Lucia continues the process of mainstreaming gender in national strategic planning and programming across government and specifically within climate change considerations, including Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions and National Adaptation Plan initiatives. Through this commitment, gender considerations have assumed more prominence in recent times from non-inclusion in Saint Lucia's First National Communication of 2001 to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC); to specific reference to women as a vulnerable group in Saint Lucia's Climate Change Adaptation Policy (CCAP) of 2015; to inclusion of gender considerations in Saint Lucia's National Adaptation Plan (NAP) and supplements of 2018 and beyond, including the Sectoral Adaptation Strategies and Actions Plans (SASAPs) in Water, Agriculture, Fisheries (2018), as well as the more recent Resilient Ecosystems Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan (REASAP, 2020).

Saint Lucias Gender Relations Department is developing the national gender equality policy and strategic plan, which includes environmental sustainability with focus on climate change as a thematic priority. The thematic priorities are geared toward capacity development, institutional strengthening institutional architecture and greater accountability.

The CCAP has identified that its success will in part depend on the extent of stakeholder (including women and vulnerable groups) ownership and participation in the implementation of the CCAP priorities. Saint Lucia has therefore continued to systematically and adequately address gender considerations in the project design, consultation, implementation and monitoring stages when project concepts are being developed, amalgamated or expanded for funding consideration. In 2019, a regional project benefitting nine Caribbean countries, including Saint Lucia, was launched - Enabling Gender-Responsive Disaster Recovery, Climate and Environmental Resilience in the Caribbean (EnGenDER). The EnGenDER project will be the starting point for a more substantive gender integration in climate change and should act as a catalyst for the acceleration of gender equality initiatives in Saint Lucia.

To foster equality in adaptation benefits, Saint Lucias NAP and associated SASAPs focus on vulnerable groups. While they include activities focusing on women and men generally based on a number of vulnerability factors, they do not identify activities that are specific to either women or men, owing to the lack of data on differential needs. Saint Lucia is working to collect and assess gender-disaggregated information allowing planners and decision-makers to consider who will be impacted even before implementation. To support this effort, Saint Lucia through the EnGenDER project will be undertaking sectoral gender assessments for selected sectors and developing guidelines for the development of gender- responsive Sectoral Adaptation Strategies and Action Plans.

As a signatory to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), Saint Lucia supports actions that seek to reaffirm its commitment to the development of its children and youth, by encouraging their involvement in the decision-making process on climate change matters at the national and global levels. Further, Saint Lucia sees the importance of preparing all children and youth, including those with disabilities, to participate in future planning/decision making processes by providing equal access to education. This is reflected in Saint Lucia acceding to the Marrakesh Treaty as it relates to Persons Who Are Blind, Visually Impaired, or Otherwise Print Disabled. Efforts are underway to pilot a project which will be expanded to provide reading support for students with print disabilities. Through the print sharing medium, climate change-relevant curriculum material will be provided to students with print disabilities, thus allowing for access to formal and informal education on climate change for all. The Government, through the National Coordinating Committee for Human Rights, works very closely with the National Council of and for Persons with Disabilities in protecting the rights of its Constituents.

As per its Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action (NAMA), the Government takes measures in the areas of renewable energy and energy efficiency solutions and technologies in school buildings (GHG emission- related activities such as lighting, air conditioning or cooking) as well as renewable energy generation on school sites. The NAMAs targets include 20% reduction in energy consumption and 16% reduction of GHG emissions [aligned with iNDC target of 16% by 2025, 23% by 2030] both to be achieved by 2025. Such efforts will increase access to adequate resilient educational infrastructure, including sustainable energy.

Saint Lucias youth and children have also been integrated into building resilience to climate change through enhancing food security through school gardening programmes and community groups. One such example in Saint Lucia is the outfitting of several primary schools with greenhouses through support programmes of the Ministry of Agriculture. The children are involved in gardening with the support of caretakers, farmers from the community and extension officers, as appropriate, noting that Agricultural Science is taught at Secondary and not Primary level. Prior to the COVID-19 global pandemic, 70-80 percent of primary schools had functional gardens. These programmes also support the national school feeding programme. There are unique arrangements for the share of produce between volunteering farmers and the schools.

1. Quantified information on the reference point, including, as appropriate, a base year a. Reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s) The reference year used in Sant Lucias updated NDC is 2010, the same as in the first NDC. b. Quantifiable information on the reference indicators, their values in the reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s), and, as applicable, in the target year Saint Lucias emissions in 2010 are estimated to be 643 GgCO2eq. as communicated in the first NDC. Net emissions considering carbon removal from forests was 572 GgCO2eq in 2010. BAU emissions from the first NDC for 2025 is 758 GgCO2e. and for 2030 is 816 GgCO2e.

This is not applicable to Saint Lucia.

d. Target relative to the reference indicator, expressed numerically, for example in percentage or amount of reduction 7% (7.2%) GHG emissions reduction in the energy sector relative to 2010, by 2030, equivalent to 37 GgCO2 eq.

The sources of data used in quantifying the reference points are the following:  Saint Lucias Intended Nationally Determined Contribution, 2015  Saint Lucias Third National Communication to the United Nations in 2020)  United States Energy Information Administration (retrieved data in 2020)  LUCELEC Annual Report, 2018  Caribbean Energy Report Card, 2019  Data provided by:

f. Information on the circumstances under which the Party may update the values of the reference indicators Saint Lucia may update the base year data in future NDCs on the basis of additional technical analysis in Biennial Update Reports, National Communications, and as the economic impacts of COVID-19 become better understood.

2 Saint Lucias 2018 National Inventory Reports is a component of the first Biennial Update Report, currently under development. 3 Data was taken from the databases of the World Bank, UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, and the United States Energy Information Administration for development indicators, population projections and energy consumption respectively, and the year referenced is the year that the data was retrieved.

a. Time frame and/or period for implementation, including start and end date, consistent with any further relevant decision adopted by the CMA;

The targets are a continuation and expansion of efforts listed in the first NDC to meet the targets for 2025 and 2030. Saint Lucia has already begun to implement these targets.

b. Whether it is a single-year or multi-year target, as applicable.

a. General description of the target; Saint Lucias target is a sector-wide emissions reductions target using 2010 as base year, covering IPCCs energy (electricity generation and transportation) sector.

b. Sectors, gases, categories and pools covered by the nationally determined contribution, including, as applicable, consistent with IPCC guidelines;

Gases:

A co-benefit of reducing CO2 emission from the electricity generation and transportation sectors is that there will also be concomitant reductions in emissions in other gases like NMVOCs.

c. How the Party has taken into consideration paragraphs 31(c) and (d) of decision 1/CP.21;

As per paragraph 31(c) of decision 1/CP.21, Saint Lucia is not including IPCCs AFOLU, IPPU and waste sectors. Saint Lucia assessed whether other sources and sinks of emissions could be included in this updated NDC, but concluded that the energy sector accounts for approximately 90% of its total emissions, and has the largest potential for significant emissions reductions. Certain data gaps in other sectors also added to the challenge of expanding the scope of this NDC. Efforts will be made to address these data gaps over time with the support of national, regional and international partners. As a Party to the Montreal Protocol, Saint Lucia is currently implementing a Kigali Amendment Enabling Activities Project with the intention to deposit the instrument of ratification by June 2021. With support, Saint Lucia intends to build capacity in this sector, with a view for possible inclusion in future NDCs.

d. Mitigation co-benefits resulting from Parties adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans, including description of specific projects, measures and initiatives of Parties adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans.

As part of the NAP process, Saint Lucia is still developing other SASAPs, which will address the remaining priority sectors: Infrastructure and Spatial Planning, Health, Education and Tourism. These additional SASAPs might include projects with co-benefits on adaptation actions. The mitigation co-benefits of adaptation actions listed here were not quantitatively evaluated due to a lack of quality data and technical resources. However, Saint Lucia has already begun efforts to implement a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan for Saint Lucias NAP, which focuses on tracking the implementation of the cross-sectoral and sectoral measures included in the NAP and SASAPs. This tool will monitor and evaluate adaptation, and to some extent, mitigation actions on climate change implemented in Saint Lucia and include new or additional information as part of the NAP iterative process. The mitigation co-benefits from forest sector interventions cannot be included at this point due to ongoing negotiations on Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, in conjunction with Saint Lucias exploration of a national REDD+ program.

a. Information on the planning processes that the Party undertook to prepare its NDC and, if available, on the Partys implementation plans, including, as appropriate:

i. Domestic institutional arrangements, public participation and engagement with local communities4 and indigenous peoples, in a gender-responsive manner;

Led by the Department of Sustainable Development in consultation with the Energy Division and the Department for Economic Development, and building on the lesson learnt from the multi-stakeholder engagement process used in 2015 to develop the first NDC, Saint Lucia began the revision process in 2019. In August 2019, Saint Lucia submitted a request for support to the NDC Partnerships Climate Action Enhancement Package (CAEP). Through the CAEP, Saint Lucia has received technical assistance from Climate Analytics (CA), the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) Commission, the Global Green Growth Institute (GGGI) and the World Resources Institute (WRI). Building on the National Energy Transition Strategy (NETS) developed in 2017 and the 2018 GHG inventory completed in 2020 under the BUR process, the DSD led a series of interlinked multi-stakeholder gender-responsive interactive consultations, including government Ministries, private sector, civil society and youth. The feedback received from the different stakeholders was taken into consideration in the energy system modeling and the mitigation options being considered. Saint Lucias Updated NDC was submitted to, and endorsed by the Cabinet of Ministers in January 2021. Implementation: Saint Lucia has developed an Implementation Plan and a Financing Strategy for the NDC. In addition, in 2019, Saint Lucias Cabinet endorsed its NDC Partnership Plan, which will be updated subsequent to the submission of the NDC to the UNFCCC.

4In the engagement of stakeholders and the development of climate-relevant instruments, the Government of Saint Lucia is guided by its Cabinet-approved Climate Change Private Sector Engagement Strategy and the Climate Change Communications Strategy.

Saint Lucias National Climate Change Committee (NCCC), established in 1998, has the mandate to provide advice and support to national climate change- related programmes and processes and comprises public, statutory, academic and private sector bodies whose work is related to climate change. Saint Lucia is working to strengthen the role of the NCCC and anticipates that the Committee will play a strong role in coordinating and facilitating the implementation of climate change actions, including that of the NDC.

ii. Contextual matters, including, inter alia, as appropriate:

1. National circumstances, such as geography, climate, economy, sustainable development and poverty eradication; national priorities include three Economic areas - tourism, agriculture and infrastructure, and three Social - healthcare, education and citizen security. Saint Lucias overarching environmental priority remains addressing the adverse effects of climate change, which impacts every area of our sustainable development. Poverty eradication: The Governments Statistics Department indicated an estimated population of 172,623 in 2015. The population is relatively young, with 46.9% below 30 years old. Saint Lucia achieved universal secondary education in 2006.

2. Best practices and experience related to the preparation of the NDC;

The following are some of the best practices that have been identified during the preparation of Saint Lucias NDC:  A key component of Saint Lucias NDC is that it was built upon existing processes, data collection, policies, initiatives, and commitments - including the NETS, NAP, SASAPs, BUR development and Saint Lucias Climate Change Research Policy and Strategy. In doing so, Saint Lucia was able to take advantage of updated inventories, robust data and cross- cutting expertise.

Capitalising on the synergies and timing of the different processes, Saint Lucia increased collaboration across Implementing Partners and reduced the need to conduct separate stakeholder consultations on similar issues, therefore reducing stakeholder fatigue. It is essential for Implementing Partners to work together in a seamless manner.

In determining the level of ambition, it was crucial for Saint Lucia to undertake long-term energy system modeling for 2050 and what would subsequently be recommended at 2030 to support energy transformation, decarbonisation and building resilience.

The engagement of stakeholders from public sector, private sector, academia and civil society was key to ensuring the interest and buy-in to the NDC process and revised targets. Specific engagement was undertaken with the youth, who account for a large percentage of the population.

Please see Section 4(a)(i) for the Cabinet-approved guidance on the engagement of stakeholders and the development of climate-relevant instruments.

b. Other contextual aspirations and priorities acknowledged when joining the Paris Agreement;

c. Specific information applicable to Parties, including regional economic integration organizations and their member States, that have reached an agreement to act jointly under Article 4, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement, including the Parties that agreed to act jointly and the terms of the agreement, in accordance with Article 4, paragraphs 1618, of the Paris Agreement;

Saint Lucia is not part of an agreement to act jointly under Article 4 of the Paris Agreement.

d. How the Partys preparation of its NDC has been informed by the outcomes of the global stocktake, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreement;

The first global stocktake will take place in 2023 and Saint Lucia is committed to the implementation, monitoring and evaluation tools to inform the progress on the targets proposed in this NDC, the NAP and SASAPs e. Each Party with an NDC under Article 4 of the Paris Agreement that consists of adaptation action and/or economic diversification plans resulting in mitigation co-benefits consistent with Article 4, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement to submit information on:

i. How the economic and social consequences of response measures have been considered in developing the NDC;

The effects on vulnerability, resilience, economic transformation and standards of living were considered in developing the updated NDC.

ii. Specific projects, measures and activities to be implemented to contribute to mitigation co-benefits, including information on adaptation plans that also yield mitigation co-benefits, which may cover, but are not limited to, key sectors, such as energy, resources, water resources, coastal resources, human settlements and urban planning, agriculture and forestry; and economic diversification actions, which may cover, but are not limited to, sectors such as manufacturing and industry, energy and mining, transport and communication, construction, tourism, real estate, agriculture and fisheries.

The following projects and project concepts are expected to have mitigation co-benefits from adaptation actions. These are included in the project portfolios of the different SASAPs or any additional adaptation projects to be implemented with international support not included within the SASAPs. Water SASAP:

Improving energy efficiency within the water sector in Saint Lucia through the introduction of renewable energy technologies into the operations of the Water and Sewerage Company Inc.

Pig farms wastewater and manure management: Piloting solutions to reduce water pollution under a changing climate.

Fisheries SASAP:  Increasing the capacity of fishers and other actors to manage climate risks through improved data management and Early Warning Systems (EWS).

Agriculture SASAP:  Climate Resilient Agriculture Demonstration Centre (CRADE): Enabling the transformation of vulnerable groups in 3 subsistence farming communities into competitive national agribusiness leaders under a changing climate.

Building Resilience for Adaptation to Climate Change vulnerabilities in Agriculture.

Resilient Ecosystems ASAP:  Establishing the basis for improving beach management and coastal erosion control under changing climate conditions in Saint Lucia.  Building ecological and livelihood resilience in Saint Lucia through the establishment of the Iyanola Park Biosphere Reserve.  Evaluation of shoreline stabilisation technologies in selected vulnerable coastal areas in Saint Lucia.  Enabling ecosystem restoration and management for climate resilience buildings.  Building climate resilience and enhancing livelihood opportunities through improved forest management in Saint Lucia.  Solving the die-back of the largest mangrove in Saint Lucia to strengthen the countrys climate resilience. As mentioned in 3(d) above, Saint Lucia is still in the process of developing additional SASAPs for other priority sectors for adaptation. As the development of the NAP and SASAPs is a continuous and ongoing process, these might, in the future, include projects with mitigation co-benefits on adaptation actions; however, they are not mentioned here as the specific projects could change or additional projects added to the current project portfolios.

5. Assumptions and methodological approaches, including those for estimating and accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and, as appropriate, removals:

a. Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals corresponding to the Partys nationally determined contribution, consistent with Saint Lucia will account for its anthropogenic GHG emissions and removals using the 2006 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories as guided by 1/CP.21 Article 4, paragraph 13 of the Paris Agreement.

b. Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for the implementation of policies and measures or strategies in the nationally determined contribution;

Please see 5(a) above. Saint Lucia will also apply specific assumptions and methodologies, where relevant, when accounting for the progress of various policies and measures in its Biennial Update Report and the 4th National Communication anticipated to start in 2021.

c. If applicable, information on how the Party will take into account existing methods and guidance under the Convention to account for anthropogenic emissions and removals, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 14, of the Paris Agreement, as appropriate;

Please see 5(a) above.

d. IPCC methodologies and metrics used for estimating anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals;

Saint Lucias emissions for CO2, CH4 and N2O will be derived using the Tier 1 method of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines.

e. Sector-, category- or activity-specific assumptions, methodologies and approaches consistent with IPCC guidance, as appropriate, including, as applicable:

i. Approach to addressing emissions and subsequent removals from natural disturbances on managed lands;

Not applicable. Saint Lucia does not currently commit to a mitigation target in the AFOLU sector.

ii. Approach used to account for emissions and removals from harvested wood products;

Not applicable.

iii. Approach used to address the effects of age-class structure in forests;

Not applicable.

f. Other assumptions and methodological approaches used for understanding the nationally determined contribution and, if applicable, estimating corresponding emissions and removals, including: i. How the reference indicators, baseline(s) and/or reference level(s), including, where applicable, sector-, category- or activity-specific reference levels, are constructed, including, for example, key parameters, assumptions, definitions, methodologies, data sources and models used;

Not applicable. Please see Section 5(a-e) for assumptions and methodologies used.

ii. For Parties with nationally determined contributions that contain non- greenhouse-gas components, information on assumptions and methodological approaches used in relation to those components, as applicable;

Not applicable.

Not applicable.

iv. Further technical information, as necessary;

Not applicable.

g. The intention to use voluntary cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, if applicable.

National level market-based instruments, such as cap-and- trade emission trading schemes and offsetting, are crucial to price carbon emissions and keep the costs of mitigation in Saint Lucia low. These will be pursued to encourage implementation of the proposed mitigation measures drawing on any applicable international arrangements. Saint Lucia is in the process of developing a national REDD+ program.

6. How the Party considers that its NDC is fair and ambitious in light of its national circumstances a. How the Party considers that its NDC is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances; The Government of Saint Lucia is steadfast in its conviction that global mitigation efforts should focus on stabilizing global GHG emissions at levels that will limit industrial levels. Nevertheless, the Government of Saint Lucia has decided to pursue an aggressive and ambitious plan to reduce its emissions by focusing on the Energy, Electricity Generation and Transportation sectors.

b. Fairness considerations, including reflecting on equity;

See 6(a) above.

c. How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 3, of the Paris Agreement;

Saint Lucias updated NDC represents a significant enhancement of its first NDC. Under the targets proposed in this updated NDC, Saint Lucia expects its total emissions to decrease from 505 GgCO2eq. (2010 estimate) within the Energy sector to 468 GgCO2eq by 2030. This would translate from an effective 2% GHG emission reduction as pledged in the 2015 NDC to 7% GHG emissions reduction in the energy sector relative to 2010, by 2030. In addition to the increase in mitigation ambition, the submission of this updated NDC, is also an enhancement in the following ways:

1. Saint Lucia has moved from a BAU approach to a base year approach. 2. Saint Lucia has strengthened the adaptation, SDG, Gender, Children/Youth and loss & damage component of the NDC. In 2019, Saint Lucias Cabinet of Ministers endorsed the NDC Partnership Plan with the goal of supporting the implementation of the 2015 targets. In line with builds upon and is to be executed alongside Saint Lucia NDC Partnership Plan.

d. How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement; The ambition of this target must be considered against the background of the countrys small, open economy and limitations in natural, financial, technological and human resources to implement the measures necessary to achieve the intended emissions reductions. It must also be noted that the value of Saint Lucias forest cover as a carbon sink is recognized, despite the fact that these values are not included in the projections.

e. How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement; Saint Lucia, as a SIDS and considering Article 4, paragraph 6, has the option to prepare and communicate strategies, plans and actions reflecting its special circumstances. In light of Saint Lucias commitment to limiting increases in global submitted a quantifiable target as outlined in 1(b) above. While Saint Lucias NDC is mitigation centric, its plans and actions addressing adaptation and the possible limits to adaptation that may result in loss and damage, are outlined in Saint Lucias NAP and SASAPs.

7. How the NDC contributes towards achieving the objectives of the Convention as set out in its Article 2 a. How the NDC contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2;

b. How the NDC contributes towards Article 2, paragraph 1(a), and Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Paris Agreement. See 6(a) above. Saint Lucia planning to work on a long-term strategy to decarbonize the economy in line with Article 2 paragraph 1(a) and Article 4 paragraph 1.

