Disclaimer All information provided in this document, including the document itself, belongs to the Government of Samoa.

Table of Contents Abbreviations and Acronyms 4 1 Executive Summary 5 2 National Circumstances 7 3 Mitigation 8 3.1 Priorities for mitigation 8 3.2 Energy sector 10 3.3 Waste sector 11 3.4 AFOLU sector 11 4 Adaptation 11 4.1 Priorities for adaptation 11 4.2 Overview of targets, measures, and requirements 12 4.3 Marine sector 12 4.4 AFOLU sector 13 5 Planning Processes 13 5.1 Information on the process to prepare the NDC 13 5.2 Information on implementation plans 14 Appendices Appendix A: Information to facilitate clarity, transparency, and understanding of Samoas Second NDC 15 Appendix B: Summary of Samoas emissions profile 24 Appendix C: Review of First NDC (2015) 25 Appendix D: Key inputs and feedback from stakeholders 26 Tables Table 3.1: Mitigation targets, means, and requirements 9 Table 4.1: Adaptation targets, means, and requirements 12 Table 6.1: Information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding of Samoas Second NDC 15 Table 6.2: Summary of Samoas GHG emissions in 1994, 2000, and 2007 24 Table 6.3: GHG emissions from the energy sector in Samoa (2007) 24 Table D.1: Number of projects that can be implemented at the same time in each sector 26 Table D.2: Key institutions and their capacity to implement GHG mitigation projects 27 Disclaimer All information provided in this document, including the document itself, belongs to the Government of Samoa.

Samoas Second Nationally Determined Contribution Samoas Second Nationally Determined Contribution Samoa is an island nation located in the Pacific Ocean, that is made up of nine (9) volcanic islands two of which are Savaii and Upolu. Upolu is the most populated where the capital city Apia is located, and Savaii is the largest of the nine.

Samoa is extremely vulnerable to climate change impacts due to its geographic location, status as a Small Island Developing State (SIDS) in the Pacific, and the importance of natural resources to its main economic sectors of fisheries, agriculture, and tourism. Samoa is only responsible for an insignificant proportion of global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Despite this, Samoa is keen to play its part in global climate change mitigation efforts.

Samoa is experiencing higher average temperatures, greater frequency in extreme daily rainfall events, and sea level rise1, as well as increases in ocean acidification and coastal erosion2. Changing weather patterns and natural disasters are impacting Samoas settlements, as 70 percent of the population and infrastructure are located in low-lying coastal areas.3 Climate change and variable weather patterns are also impacting the countrys primary industries, such as agriculture and fishing.

Predicted increases in extreme weather conditions from climate change indicates that Samoa will face even greater impacts in the future, in addition to living with the constant threat of earthquakes and tsunamis. These impacts, combined with the recent economic shock caused by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, are making the Governments poverty alleviation and national development goals more challenging.

According to Samoas Second National Communication (SNC) to the United Nations Framework Convention Climate Change (UNFCCC), Samoa emitted a total of 352.03 Gg carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) in 2007. The energy sector accounted for 50 percent of this total, the agriculture forestry and other land use (AFOLU) sector accounted for 38 percent, the waste sector accounted for 9 percent, and the industrial processes and product use (IPPU) sector accounted for 3 percent.

As a leader in climate action and committing to the urgency of the Paris Agreement, Samoa has developed its Second NDC undertaking an inclusive stakeholder engagement process with key national stakeholders, ministries, and departments, with the technical assistance and support of the Regional Pacific NDC Hub and the Global Green Growth Institute (GGGI), in collaboration with the strategic advisory firm Castalia.

Considering its negligible GHG emissions and limited resources, as well as the ongoing disruption and uncertainty brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic, Samoas Second NDC is ambitious and reflects the urgency of the Paris Agreement.

Samoas Second Nationally Determined Contribution Samoas Second Nationally Determined Contribution Mitigation Samoa aims to reduce overall GHG emissions by 26 percent in 2030 compared to 2007 levels (or by 91 Gg CO2e compared to the new reference year4 once Samoas GHG emissions inventory has been updated).5 This economy-wide emissions reduction target comprises the following sector-specific mitigation targets:

Energy - reduce GHG emissions in the energy sector6 by 30 percent in 2030 compared to 2007 levels (or by 53 Gg CO2e compared to the new reference year once the GHG emissions inventory is updated).7  Waste - reduce GHG emissions in the waste sector by 4 percent in 2030 compared to 2007 levels (or by 1.2 Gg CO2e compared to the new reference year once the GHG emissions inventory is updated).

AFOLU - reduce GHG emissions in the AFOLU sector by 26 percent in 2030 compared to 2007 levels (or by 35.2 Gg CO2e compared to the new reference year once the GHG emissions inventory is updated). Adaptation Samoas National Climate Change Policy 2020  2030 provides the framework for both national adaptation and mitigation actions through a whole-of-country approach to build resilience to the impacts of climate change. At the community level, Samoa has developed Community Integrated Management (CIM) Plans which identify prioritized adaptation actions by all of Samoas 368 villages to enhance their climate resilience. This work builds on Samoas successful implementation of its National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) in 2005.

Building on current adaptation actions, Samoa identifies the following quantitative targets that contribute to adaptation in the marine and AFOLU sectors:

Marine - expand the area of mangrove forests in Samoa by 5 percent by 2030 relative to 2018.8  AFOLU - expand the area under agroforestry to an additional 5 percent of agricultural land by 2030 relative to 2018.9  AFOLU - manage forests sustainably and increase total forest cover by 2 percent by 2030 relative to 2013.10 It is expected that these adaptation targets will also contribute to mitigation.11 Mitigation and adaptation targets are conditional on external financial support. 4 Gross emissions of 352.03 Gg in 2007 are taken as the baseline for this overall target. Samoas last comprehensive GHG inventory was prepared in 2007. It monitored the years 2000 to 2007 for each sector. Samoa is in the process of updating its GHG inventory to reflect changes since 2007. However, given the urgency of developing a Second NDC for Samoa, the Government of Samoa has used 2007 data to develop this Second NDC. SIDS have flexibility in their submissions under the Paris Agreement, therefore Samoa has included this alternative specification of the overall mitigation target to ensure it can use updated information on national emissions when this becomes available. 5 This overall target, and the subsidiary sector-specific targets, are set based on the aggregate emissions reduction potential of a pipeline of climate change mitigation projects identified in Samoas NDC Implementation Roadmap and NDC Investment Plan. The economy-wide target accounts for emissions reductions from adaptation actions, therefore it is greater than the sum of the energy, waste, and AFOLU sector mitigation targets. 6 To ensure accuracy against GHG emissions reported in 2007, the energy sector includes the electricity, land transport, maritime transport, and tourism sub-sectors. While emissions from these sub-sectors were not reported in a way that would allow Samoa to form sub-sector targets relative to the 2007 emissions inventory baseline, Samoa would like to put forward to following mass-based sub-sector GHG emissions reduction targets that can be applied relative to the new reference year once the GHG emissions inventory is updated:

Electricity 44.2 Gg CO2e  Land transport 5.2 Gg CO2e  Maritime transport 3.0 Gg CO2e  Tourism 0.5 Gg CO2e 2. National Circumstances Geographical characteristics The Independent State of Samoa consists of two main islands, Savaii (1,700 square kilometers) and Upolu (1,100 square kilometers), and eight smaller islands, making up a total land area of 2,900 square kilometers.12 The capital, Apia, is located on Upolu. Samoa has an exclusive economic zone (EEZ) of 120,000 square kilometers.13 Samoa has mountainous terrain as well as narrow coastal settlements.14 Samoa is experiencing greater maximum air temperature, greater frequency in extreme daily rainfall events, sea level rise of 5.2 millimeters (mm) per annum, and maximum hourly sea level increasing at a rate of 8.2 mm per annum,20 as well as increases in ocean acidification and coastal erosion.21 Higher sea-surface temperatures, cyclones, and longer, more frequent droughts are additional climate change-related risks for Samoa.22 Samoa is extremely vulnerable to the impacts of climate change because about 70 percent of the population and infrastructure are located in low-lying coastal areas,23 and citizens rely on the productivity of primary industries such as agriculture and fishing, which have been adversely impacted by changing weather patterns and natural disasters.24 Population profile Samoas total population is approximately 202,500.25 Of this total, approximately 77 percent live on Upolu, 22 percent live on Savaii, and the remaining population live on the outer islands of Manono and Apolima.26 Approximately 19 percent of Samoas population live in urban areas, while 81 percent live in rural areas.27 The country has approximately 340 villages, which are divided into 43 districts. These districts are grouped into four regions: Apia Urban Area (AUA), North-West Upolu (NWU), Rest of Upolu (ROU) and Savaii (SAV).28 Samoas average population density is 70 people per square kilometer.29 Samoa has a relatively young population, with a median age of 22 years.30 More than 57 percent of the population is aged 15-64 years, 37 percent are aged under 15, while only 5 percent are 65 years old and above.31 Approximately 23 percent of Samoas population live below the poverty line, as of 2018.32 Poverty rates have fluctuated over the past ten years, largely due to Cyclone Evan (2012), Cyclone Gita (2018), and the measles epidemic (2019). Poverty rates are expected to increase due to the COVID-19 pandemic.33 Socio-economic background Samoas Gross Domestic Product (GDP) for the year ended December 2020 was US$733 million, with a per capita GDP of US$3,630.34 Economic activity declined by 8 percent in the December 2020 quarter, due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.35 Before the pandemic, Samoas GDP for the year ended December 2019 was US$804 million, with a per capita GDP of US$3,970.36 The service sector (tertiary sector) is the largest contributing sector, making up approximately 74 percent of total nominal GDP in 2019.37 The primary sectors (including agriculture and fisheries) share of GDP has declined in recent years, contributing approximately 10 percent of GDP in 2019.38 The total value of Samoas exports was US$49 million in 201939, made up of approximately 28 percent re- exports, and 72 percent domestically produced exports40. The top five exported products (by trade value) are petroleum41, fresh fish, taro, crude coconut oil, and beer42. Exports are sent chiefly to American Samoa, New Zealand, the United States, Tokelau, and Australia.43 Exports are subject to constraints, such as price instability, high transport costs, lack of overseas markets, and harsh weather conditions.

3. Mitigation 3.1 Priorities for Mitigation According to Samoas SNC to the UNFCCC, Samoas total GHG emissions was 352.03 Gg CO2e in 2007.44 50 percent of this total comes from the energy sector, while 38 percent comes from the AFOLU sector. Waste and Industrial Processes and Product Use (IPPU) emit 12 percent of GHGs in Samoa.45 In developing this NDC, Samoa focused on opportunities to reduce emissions in the energy sector (including electricity, land transport, maritime transport, and tourism), the waste sector, and the AFOLU sector. Samoa did not develop a GHG emissions reduction target for the industrial processes and product use (IPPU) sector because:  GHG emissions from IPPU represent only a small fraction (less than 3 percent) of Samoas total GHG emissions, given the absence of mineral, chemical, metal, electronics, and other manufacturing industries as well as the limited use of lubricants, paraffin waxes, and solvents.

There is a lack of data on emissions from the IPPU sector. Samoa wishes to communicate the following targets for reducing GHG emissions in the energy, waste and AFOLU sectors, detailed in Table 3.1.

Table 3.1: Mitigation targets, means, and requirements Sector Target46 Subsector Means Requirements Energy47  Reduce GHG emissions in the energy sector by 30 percent in 2030 compared to 2007 levels (or by 53 Gg CO2e compared to the new reference year levels once the GHG emissions inventory is updated)48  Samoa will need external financial support to reach its renewable electricity target  Samoa will need external financial support to implement energy efficiency projects, grid stabilization projects, and network loss reduction work Samoa requires external financial support and technical assistance to support electrification of vehicles and shared electric micro mobility Maritime transport  Develop shore side electricity supply for vessels and reviewing the energy efficiency of maritime transport  Conduct studies to understand viability of low carbon maritime transport options  Samoa can develop shore side electricity supply for at-berth vessels and review energy efficiency in the sector without external financial support  Samoa requires external financial support to introduce renewable energy technologies to vessels  Samoa requires external financial support and technical assistance to support projects to scope and develop low-carbon maritime transport options  Given the lack of visitors caused by COVID-19, Samoas tourism sector will require grant funding and external financial support to adopt energy efficient appliances Waste  Reduce GHG emissions in the waste sector by 4 percent in 2030 compared to 2007 levels (or by 1.2 Gg CO2e compared to the new reference year levels once the GHG emissions inventory is updated)  Samoa requires external financial support and technical assistance to implement landfill gas capturing technologies AFOLU  Reduce GHG emissions in the sector by 26 percent in 2030 compared to 2007 levels (or by 35.2 Gg CO2e compared to the new reference year levels once the GHG emissions inventory is updated)  Improve agriculture practices through improved manure management and fertilizer use  Samoa requires external financial support and technical assistance to improve manure management, fertilizer use, support reforestation, forest restoration, and the expansion of agroforestry Note: Targets are informed by the emissions reduction potential of projects in the NDC Implementation Roadmap and NDC Investment Plan (including project pipeline), which has been developed alongside Samoas Second NDC. 46474849 46 Samoas last comprehensive GHG inventory was prepared in 2007. It monitored the years 2000 to 2007 for each sector. Samoa is in the process of updating its GHG inventory to reflect changes since 2007. However, given the aim of developing a Second NDC for Samoa, the Government of Samoa has used 2007 data to develop this Second NDC. 47 To ensure accuracy against GHG emissions reported in 2007, the following sub-sectors have been included under the energy sector: > Electricity > Land transport > Maritime transport > Tourism Each sub-sector has specific means to achieve the energy sector target. 48 To avoid double counting, the GHG emissions reductions of the 100 percent renewable electricity sector project is taken as the total GHG emissions reduction potential in the electricity sub-sector. 49 Micro mobility refers to a range of small, lightweight vehicles operating at speeds typically below 25 km/h and are driven by users personally for short distance trips. Vehicles include bicycles, e-bikes, and e-scooters. This project envisages the introduction of shared e-scooters.

3.2 Energy Sector Targets Samoa aims to reduce GHG emissions in the energy sector50 by 30 percent in 2030 compared to 2007 levels51 (or by 53 Gg CO2e compared to the new reference year once the GHG emissions inventory is updated).52 Reducing GHG emissions in the electricity sub-sector may be achieved by expanding renewable electricity generation, introducing monitoring and energy efficiency programs, and introducing grid stabilization and network loss reduction programs. Samoa aims to generate 100 percent of electricity from renewable sources by 2025. Samoa will require external financial support to achieve this goal. The successful adoption of energy efficiency programs will require appropriate financing measures to meet greater upfront costs of energy efficient buildings and appliances. These energy efficiency projects will also require external financial support. Grid stabilization and network loss reduction programs will require technology transfer, capacity building, and external financial support.

Reducing GHG emissions in the land transport sector may be achieved by initially electrifying a percentage of vehicles in Samoa, with an incremental percentage increase each year. This shall also provide an opportunity for the inclusion of shared electric micro mobility.53 The successful adoption of these measures will require further feasibility studies and assessments, public acceptance of changes to transportation modes, technology transfer, capacity building, and external financial support.

Reducing GHG emissions in the maritime transport sector may be achieved by developing shore side electricity supply for vessels and reviewing the energy efficiency of maritime transport, introducing renewable energy technologies to vessels (solar and biodiesel), and conducting studies to understand viability of low carbon transport options. While energy efficiency reviews and development of shore-side electricity supply can be achieved without external financial support, the development of renewable energy technologies on vessels and the exploration of low-carbon maritime transport options will require technology transfer, capacity building, and external financial support.

Reducing GHG emissions in the tourism sector may be achieved by implementing and monitoring energy efficiency programs for appliances. The successful adoption of energy efficient appliances will require appropriate financing measures to meet greater upfront costs, however these could be funded by long-term electricity costs savings. Given the lack of visitors caused by COVID-19, Samoas tourism sector will require grant funding and external financial support to adopt energy efficient appliances.

50 To ensure accuracy against GHG emissions reported in 2007, the following sub-sectors have been included under the energy sector:  Electricity  Land transport  Maritime transport  Tourism Each sub-sector has specific means to achieve the energy sector target. 51 Samoas last comprehensive GHG inventory was prepared in 2007. It monitored the years 2000 to 2007 for each sector. Samoa is in the process of updating its GHG inventory to reflect changes since 2007. However, given the urgency of developing a Second NDC for Samoa, the Government of Samoa has used 2007 data to develop this Second NDC. 52 To avoid double counting, the GHG emissions reductions of the 100 percent renewable electricity sector project is taken as the total GHG emissions reduction potential in the electricity sub-sector. 53 Micro mobility refers to a range of small, lightweight vehicles operating at speeds typically below 25 km/h and are driven by users personally for short distance trips. Vehicles include bicycles, e-bikes, and e-scooters. This project envisages the introduction of shared e-scooters.

3.3 Waste Sector Targets Samoa set the target of reducing GHG emissions in the waste sector by 4 percent in 2030 compared to 2007 levels54 (or by 1.2 Gg CO2e compared to the new reference year once the GHG emissions inventory is updated).

Overview of measures and requirements to achieve targets Reducing GHG emissions in the waste sector may be achieved by installing geomembranes on landfills in Samoa to capture landfill gas (mainly methane from the anaerobic decomposition of organic material). The successful adoption of this measure will require technology transfer, capacity building, and external financial support.

3.4 AFOLU Sector Targets Samoa set the target of reducing GHG emissions in the AFOLU sector by 26 percent in 2030 compared to 2007 levels55 (or by 35.2 Gg CO2e compared to the new reference year once the GHG emissions inventory is updated).

Overview of measures and requirements to achieve targets Reducing GHG emissions in the AFOLU sector may be achieved by improving agriculture practices through improved manure management and fertilizer use, and reforestation, forest restoration, and promoting agroforestry. The success of improving agriculture practices will require public acceptance of changes to business-as-usual practices, external technical expertise, and external financial support. Reforestation, forest restoration, and promotion of agroforestry will require considerable technical expertise and external financial support. At the national level the consent from landowners and various stakeholders is required to determine the land areas that can be used for forest restoration and reforestation that will be monitored by the designated entity.

Samoa recognizes that climate change will have significant impacts on the country, particularly in sectors including agriculture, health, tourism, forestry, and water as well as coastal infrastructure and marine ecosystems. These sectors and priority areas are highlighted within the Community Integrated Management (CIM) Plans and National Climate Change Policy 2020-2030.

54 Samoas last comprehensive GHG inventory was prepared in 2007. It monitored the years 2000 to 2007 for each sector. Samoa is in the process of updating its GHG inventory to reflect changes since 2007. However, given the urgency of developing a Second NDC for Samoa, the Government of Samoa has used 2007 data to develop this Second NDC. 55 Samoas last comprehensive GHG inventory was prepared in 2007. It monitored the years 2000 to 2007 for each sector. Samoa is in the process of updating its GHG inventory to reflect changes since 2007. However, given the urgency of developing a Second NDC for Samoa, the Government of Samoa has used 2007 data to develop this Second NDC.

4.2 Overview of Targets, Measures, and Requirements In addition to building on the activities outlined in its the Community Integrated Management (CIM) Plans and current National Climate Change Policy 2020-2030, Samoa wishes to communicate the following quantitative targets for adapting to climate change in the marine and AFOLU sectors, as detailed in Table 4.1.565758 Table 4.1: Adaptation targets, means, and requirements Sector Target Means Requirements Marine  Expand the area of  Samoa requires external funding support and technical assistance to support mangrove restoration and planting AFOLU  Expand the area under agroforestry to an additional 5 percent of agricultural land by 2030 relative to 201857  Awareness raising activities and targeted support, including provision of seedlings  Samoa can promote the expansion of agroforestry with external financial support and external technical assistance  Manage the use of forest sustainably and increase total forest cover by 2 percent by 2030 relative to 201358  Develop a program for reforestation and forest restoration supported by incentive payments  Samoa requires external financial support and technical assistance to manage forests sustainably and incentivize reforestation and forest restoration It is expected that these adaptation targets will also contribute to mitigation.59 4.3 Marine Sector Targets Samoa has set the target of expanding the area of mangrove forests by 5 percent by 2030 relative to 2018.60 Expanding the area of mangrove forest will help to protect coastal areas and communities against coastal flooding, coastal erosion, and storm surges. It will also provide valuable habitat for fish, help to protect marine ecosystems, and enhance ecosystem services.

Overview of measures and requirements to achieve targets Expansion of the area under mangrove forests may be achieved through a large-scale program to plant and restore mangrove forests. The success of mangrove restoration and planting will require technical expertise, external financial support, and consent from various stakeholders (including coastal villages) in order to determine the areas on which mangroves will be planted and how mangroves will be planted and monitored.

4.4 AFOLU Sector Targets Samoa has set two quantitative targets to contribute to adaptation in the AFOLU sector.

Firstly, Samoa aims to expand the area under agroforestry to an additional 5 percent of agricultural land by 2030 relative to 2018.61 Increasing the use of agroforestry is expected to contribute to several important ecosystem services. For example, agroforestry systems help protect crops from cyclone damage, diversify agricultural incomes, and reduce riverine flood risk.

Secondly, Samoa aims to manage forests sustainably and increase total forest cover by 2 percent by 2030 relative to 2013.62 Managing forests responsibly and promoting afforestation is expected to moderate stream flow (reducing the risk of riverine flooding and drought), protect indigenous ecosystems, preserve cultural values, and maintain the supply of non-timber forest products.

Overview of measures and requirements to achieve targets It is expected that expanding agroforestry will be achieved by awareness raising activities that promote traditional knowledge of agroforestry systems and provide targeted support, including providing seedlings to landholders. Samoa can support the expansion of agroforestry without the need for external financial support, however the success of the agroforestry program will require external technical assistance as well as consent from landholders to determine the areas on which trees will be planted and who will be responsible for planting and monitoring the trees.

It is expected that Samoa can manage forests sustainably gradually and increase total forest cover by developing a program for reforestation and forest restoration. Samoa would require external financial support and technical assistance to develop this program. The expansion of forest area would also require consent from various stakeholders in order to determine the areas on which forest will be planted and who will be responsible for planting and monitoring these areas.

5. Planning Processes 5.1 Information on the process to prepare the NDC Several key sectoral policies, plans, and strategies inform Samoas Second NDC. The Strategy for the Development of Samoa (2016) (SDS) and Samoa 2040 (2021) are Samoas overarching national planning documents. The SDS lays out the strategy for Samoas overall development based on the four pillars of sustainable development (economic, social, infrastructure, and environment). Samoa 2040 focuses on Samoas growth, particularly in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

Other key documents include the Samoa Climate Change Policy 2020, the National Environment Sector Plan 2017-2021, the Energy Sector Plan 2017-2022 (2017), the Energy Management Act (2020), the Transport Sector Plan 2013-2018 (2013), and the Agriculture Sector Plan 2016-2020 (ASP), as well as the National Policy for Gender Equality 2021-2031 (2021) and the Inclusive Governance Policy 2021-2031 (2021). A full list of key sectorial plans and strategies is included in Appendix A.

Samoas Second Nationally Determined Contribution Samoas Second Nationally Determined Contribution The Government of Samoa has led the development of Samoas Second NDC. Progress towards achieving the targets identified in Samoas First NDC was reviewed and mitigation and adaptation opportunities to contribute to this Second NDC were identified. Further details of the review of the First NDC is included in Appendix C. The work to identify mitigation and adaptation opportunities for Samoas Second NDC focused on identifying climate change mitigation and adaptation investment projects, which were informed by data sets, academic studies, policies, strategies, and other reports, as well as consultation workshops and meetings with national stakeholders, including government and non-government organizations, the private sector, and civil society. Given the focus on identifying climate change mitigation and adaptation investment projects rather than policy or regulatory interventions, there will likely be other opportunities to reduce emissions in Samoa beyond those used to form the targets in this NDC.

The recommendations from the review of Samoas First NDC, project scoping exercise, and stakeholder consultations were integrated into the NDC Implementation Roadmap and NDC Investment Plan, discussed in section 5.2. The findings were then validated by MNRE and relevant stakeholders through national consultation workshops and meetings. These workshops and meetings were attended by stakeholders from government and private sector. The Second NDC was prepared building on these recommendations and a second validation process was undertaken based on the draft Second NDC. The Second NDC content had then been agreed across ministries and departments.

5.2 Information on implementation plans The Government of Samoa is currently developing an NDC Implementation Roadmap and NDC Investment Plan (including project pipeline). This work has been undertaken in parallel with developing Samoas Second NDC. The NDC Implementation Roadmap and NDC Investment Plan informs the targets included in this NDC and will support Samoa in achieving these targets by setting out practical steps and tangible projects to mitigate GHG emissions across the energy (including sub-sectors), waste, AFOLU, and marine sectors.

6. Fairness and Ambition Samoa is a SIDS and its GHG emissions are negligible on a global scale. Samoa is highly vulnerable to climate change, due to its geography (with majority of the population living in low-lying coastal areas), and its reliance on primary industries (agriculture and fishing) which have been particularly impacted by changing weather patterns and natural disasters. Approximately 22.7 percent of Samoas population live below the poverty line, as of 2018.63 Poverty rates have fluctuated over the past ten years, largely due to Cyclone Evan (2012), Cyclone Gita (2018), and the measles epidemic (2019). Poverty rates are expected to increase due to the COVID-19 pandemic and its impacts on the tourism sector.63 Achieving the targets set out in Samoas Second NDC will require investment of large proportions of Samoas fiscal budget and public service capacity. The country also requires considerable external financial support, capacity building, and technology investment. Accounting for these national circumstances, Samoa considers its NDC to be fair and ambitious.

Appendix A: Information to facilitate clarity, transparency, and understanding of Samoas Second NDC Table 6.1 details information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding of Samoas Second NDC. 6465 Table 6.1: Information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding of Samoas Second NDC 1. Quantifiable information on the reference point (including, as appropriate, a base year) a) Reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s) The GHG emissions reduction targets in this NDC are defined for the year 2030 and measured against a base year of 2007 (or measured against the new reference year64 once the GHG emissions inventory has been updated). The 2007 base year was chosen to make use of the most recent comprehensive GHG inventory. Samoas 2007 emissions inventory did not include data on marine sector emissions and removals, so it was not possible to set a percentage-based target for emissions reductions in this sector. Therefore, Samoa has set an area-based target for mangrove restoration using recent land cover estimates from 2018.

Total GHG emissions in Samoa in 2007 were 352.03 Gg CO2e, of which the:  Energy sector contributed 174.35 Gg CO2e  AFOLU sector contributed 135.37 Gg CO2e  Waste sector contributed 32.81 Gg CO2e  IPPU sector contributed 9.51 Gg CO2e65 The breakdown of total GHG emissions in Samoa in 2007 is included in Appendix B.

Relevant strategies, plans, and actions include:  Overarching documents:

Samoa 2040 (2021)  Samoa Climate Change Policy 2020  Low Carbon Development Strategy 2020-2030 (draft 2021)  National Environment Sector Plan (2019)  National Policy for Gender Equality 2021-2031 (2021)  Inclusive Governance Policy 2021-2031 (2021)  National Appropriate Mitigation Actions Plan (NAMA) (2016)  Samoas Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) (2015)  Second National Communication to the UNFCCC (2009)  GHG Inventory (2007) 64 This new reference year should be the most recent year for which Samoas updated emissions inventory estimates GHG emissions by sector. Samoas last comprehensive GHG inventory was prepared in 2007. It monitored the years 2000 to 2007 for each sector. Samoa is in the process of updating its GHG inventory to reflect changes since 2007. However, given the urgency of developing a Second NDC for Samoa, the Government of Samoa has used 2007 data to develop this Second NDC.

Samoas Second Nationally Determined Contribution Samoas Second Nationally Determined Contribution  Waste sector:  National Waste Management Strategy 2019-2023 (NWMS)  Water and Sanitation Sector Plan (WSSP) (2017) d) Target relative to the reference indicator, expressed numerically, for example in percentage or amount of reduction Overall GHG emissions reduction of 26 percent in 2030 compared to 2007 levels66 (or 91 Gg CO2e compared to the new reference year once Samoas GHG emissions inventory has been updated).67 This will be achieved by targets for each priority sector, which are:  Energyreduce GHG emissions in the energy sector68 by 30 percent in 2030 compared to 2007 levels (or by 53 Gg CO2e compared to the new reference year once the GHG emissions inventory is updated).69  Wastereduce GHG emissions in the waste sector by 4 percent in 2030 compared to 2007 levels (or by 1.2 Gg CO2e compared to the new reference year once the GHG emissions inventory is updated).

AFOLUreduce GHG emissions in the AFOLU sector by 26 percent in 2030 compared to 2007 levels (or by 35.2 Gg CO2e compared to the new reference year once the GHG emissions inventory is updated).

Marineexpand the area of mangrove forests in Samoa by 5 percent by 2030 relative to 2018.70  AFOLUexpand the area under agroforestry to an additional 5 percent of agricultural land by 2030 relative to 2018.71  AFOLUmanage forests sustainably and increase total forest cover by 2 percent by 2030 relative to 2013.72 66 Samoas last comprehensive GHG inventory was prepared in 2007. It monitored the years 2000 to 2007 for each sector. Samoa is in the process of updating its GHG inventory to reflect changes since 2007. However, given the urgency of developing a Second NDC for Samoa, the Government of Samoa has used 2007 data to develop this Second NDC. 67 The overall target, and the subsidiary sector-specific targets, are set based on the aggregate emissions reduction potential of a pipeline of climate change mitigation projects identified in Samoas NDC Implementation Roadmap and NDC Investment Plan. Based on the requests from the Government of Samoa, GGGI, as an implementation partner of the Regional Pacific NDC Hub, engaged a consulting firm Castalia Advisors Ltd to enhance Samoas NDC and develop an NDC Implementation Roadmap and NDC Investment Plan. This project involved gathering inputs from stakeholders in Samoa, identifying gaps in and progress of the First NDC, forming mitigation targets in the electricity, land and maritime transport, tourism, waste, marine, and AFOLU sectors in Samoa, and identifying measures to achieve these targets. It also involved developing an NDC Implementation Roadmap and NDC Investment Plan that sets out practical steps and tangible projects that will help Samoa achieve its NDC targets.

The reference indicators for national and sectoral emissions may be updated to reflect the most recent information once the next GHG inventory is published. Information on any updates made will be reflected in Samoas Third National Communication to the UNFCCC.

2. Time frames and/or periods for implementation a) Time frame and/or period for implementation, including start and end date, consistent with any further relevant decision adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA) The implementation period of Samoas Second NDC is 1 January 2022 to 31 December 2030 3. Scope and coverage a) General description of the target Overall GHG emissions reduction of 26 percent in 2030 compared to 2007 levels73 (or 91 Gg CO2e compared to the new reference year once Samoas GHG emissions inventory has been updated).74 This will be achieved by targets for each priority sector, which are:  Energyreduce GHG emissions in the energy sector75 by 30 percent in 2030 compared to 2007 levels (or by 53 Gg CO2e compared to the new reference year once the GHG emissions inventory is updated).76  Wastereduce GHG emissions in the waste sector by 4 percent in 2030 compared to 2007 levels (or by 1.2 Gg CO2e compared to the new reference year once the GHG emissions inventory is updated).

AFOLUreduce GHG emissions in the AFOLU sector by 26 percent in 2030 compared to 2007 levels (or by 35.2 Gg CO2e compared to the new reference year once the GHG emissions inventory is updated).

Marineexpand the area of mangrove forests in Samoa by 5 percent by 2030 relative to 2018.77  AFOLUexpand the area under agroforestry to an additional 5 percent of agricultural land by 2030 relative to 2018.78  AFOLUmanage forests sustainably and increase total forest cover by 2 percent by 2030 relative to 2013.79 73 Samoas last comprehensive GHG inventory was prepared in 2007. It monitored the years 2000 to 2007 for each sector. Samoa is in the process of updating its GHG inventory to reflect changes since 2007. However, given the urgency of developing a Second NDC for Samoa, the Government of Samoa has used 2007 data to develop this Second NDC. 74 The overall target, and the subsidiary sector-specific targets, are set based on the aggregate emissions reduction potential of a pipeline of climate change mitigation projects identified in Samoas NDC Implementation Roadmap and NDC Investment Plan. Based on the requests from the Government of Samoa, GGGI, as an implementation partner of the Regional Pacific NDC Hub, engaged a consulting firm Castalia Advisors Ltd to enhance Samoas NDC and develop an NDC Implementation Roadmap and NDC Investment Plan. This project involved gathering inputs from stakeholders in Samoa, identifying gaps in and progress of the First NDC, forming mitigation targets in the electricity, land and maritime transport, tourism, waste, marine, and AFOLU sectors in Samoa, and identifying measures to achieve these targets. It also involved developing an NDC Implementation Roadmap and NDC Investment Plan that sets out practical steps and tangible projects that will help Samoa achieve its NDC targets.

Samoas Second Nationally Determined Contribution Samoas Second Nationally Determined Contribution b) Sectors, gases, categories and pools covered by the nationally determined contribution, including, as applicable, consistent with Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) guidelines;

(CH4), Nitrous oxide (N2O), Carbon monoxide (CO), Sulphur dioxide (SO2), Non-Volatile organic compound (NMVOC), Nitrogen Oxide (NOx)  All targets will be expressed in CO2 equivalent (CO2e) c) How the country has taken into consideration paragraph 31(c) and (d) of decision 1/CP.21:

(c) Parties strive to include all categories of anthropogenic emissions or removals in their nationally determined contributions and, once a source, sink or activity is included, continue to include it (d) Parties shall provide an explanation of why any categories of anthropogenic emissions or removals are excluded Samoa aimed to include all categories of anthropogenic emissions or removals into its Second NDC. A target for GHG emission reduction for the industrial processes and product use (IPPU) sector was not developed because:  GHG emissions from IPPU represent only a small fraction (less than 3 percent) of Samoas total GHG emissions, given the absence of mineral, chemical, metal, electronics, and other manufacturing industries as well as the limited use of lubricants, paraffin waxes, and solvents.

There is a lack of data on emissions from the IPPU sector. Omission of this sector has a negligible impact on Samoas Second NDC.

Not applicable. Samoa accounts for mitigation co-benefits from adaptation actions included in this NDC as mitigation actions, in accordance with the planning processes and approaches outlined in Section 5 of this document.

4. Planning processes a) Information on the planning processes that the country undertook to prepare its NDC and, if available, on the countrys implementation plans, including, as appropriate: i) Domestic institutional arrangements, public participation and engagement with local communities and indigenous peoples, in a gender-responsive manner NDC Implementation Roadmap and NDC Investment Plan project Based on the request from the Government of Samoa to the Regional Pacific NDC Hub, GGGI, as an implementation partner of the Regional Pacific NDC Hub, engaged a consulting firm80 to prepare Samoas Second NDC and develop an NDC Implementation Roadmap and NDC Investment Plan. This project involved gathering inputs from stakeholders in Samoa, identifying opportunities for improvement in and progress of the First NDC, forming mitigation targets in the electricity, land and maritime transport, tourism, waste, marine, and AFOLU sectors in Samoa, and identifying measures to achieve these targets. It also involved developing an NDC Implementation Roadmap and NDC Investment Plan (including project pipeline) that sets out practical steps and tangible projects that will help Samoa achieve its Second NDC goals. Stakeholders throughout this project included government officials, technical experts, and other industry representatives. The NDC Implementation Roadmap and NDC Investment Plan included gender responsive considerations in the form of guidelines for promoting gender and social inclusion. MNRE took a coordinating role in gathering input from stakeholders and reviewing the outputs of the project.

80 Castalia Advisors Ltd.

a. National circumstances, such as geography, climate, economy, sustainable development, and poverty eradication  Samoa is a small island developing state, comprising four main inhabited islands and six small, uninhabited islands.  Samoas climate is characterized by high rainfall and humidity, near-uniform temperatures throughout the year, winds dominated by the south-easterly trade winds and the occurrence of tropical cyclones during the southern- hemisphere summer.

Samoas geography and economic structure make the country susceptible to the adverse impacts of climate change. Agriculture and fishing are significant economic sectors in Samoa that are vulnerable to climate change. Exports are subject to a number of constraints, such as price instability, high transport costs, lack of overseas markets, and harsh weather conditions.

Tourism is also an important part of Samoas economy, which has been hard hit by travel restrictions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.

Approximately 22.7 percent of Samoas population live below the poverty line, as of 2018.81 Poverty rates have fluctuated over the past ten years, largely due to Cyclone Evan (2012), Cyclone Gita (2018), and the measles epidemic (2019). Poverty rates are expected to increase due to the COVID-19 pandemic.82  Samoa has made progress on its sustainable development goals (SDGs). A breakdown on Samoas progress can be found on the SDG Knowledge Platform.83 b. Best practices and experience related to the preparation of the nationally determined contributions Samoa regards coordination between and consultation of all relevant stakeholders and alignment with existing policies, strategies, and roadmaps, and sustainable development goals (SDGs) as crucial to the development and effective implementation of its NDC. Samoa also recognizes the need to strengthen data collection to comply with the 2006 IPCC Guidelines.

c. Other contextual aspirations and priorities acknowledged when joining the Paris Agreement Not applicable. Samoa did not acknowledge any other contextual aspirations and priorities when joining the Paris Agreement.

Not applicable. Samoa is not part of any joint fulfilment agreement under Article 4, paragraph 2 of the Paris Agreement.

According to Article 14, paragraph 2 of the Paris Agreement, the first global stock take will take place in 2023. In line with Article 14, paragraph 3 of the Paris Agreement, the outcome of the global stock take will inform Samoa in updating and enhancing its future nationally determined contributions.

Not applicable. Samoa accounts for mitigation co-benefits from adaptation actions included in this NDC as mitigation actions, in accordance with the planning processes and approaches outlined in Section 5 of this document.

Samoas Second Nationally Determined Contribution Samoas Second Nationally Determined Contribution 5. Assumptions and methodological approaches, including those for estimating and accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and, as appropriate, removals:

31b. Parties ensure methodological consistency, including on baselines, between the communication and implementation of nationally determined contributions Samoas first GHG emission inventory was published in 1999, covering the years 19941997. Samoas second, and most recent, GHG emissions inventory focused on emissions for the years 20002007, and included a revision of the results from the first GHG inventory to allow a complete assessment of national GHG emission trends. Samoas GHG emissions and removals in 2007 totaled 352 Gg CO2e and 787.07 Gg CO2e respectively. A summary of Samoas GHG emissions for the years 1994 (base-year), 2000, and 2007 is presented in Table 6.2.

The anthropogenic emissions and removals in Samoas second GHG inventory were prepared in accordance with the methodologies and common metrics described in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (2006 IPCC Guidelines). However, although the 2006 IPCC Guidelines provide a comprehensive overview and categorization of all potential sources of GHG emissions, not all of them are relevant to Samoa. In addition, although certain sources are relevant to Samoa, there are insufficient data to include them in the inventory. Samoa therefore also used the Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories as they better reflected national circumstances.

Samoa is currently updating its GHG inventory, following the 2006 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, and the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, using the Tier 1 approach and applying default emission factors.

When accounting for the impacts of implementing measures or strategies in the nationally determined contributions in the energy, AFOLU, and waste sectors, Samoa will follow the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National GHG Inventories, and the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National GHG Inventories, using the Tier 1 approach and applying default emission factors. Samoa will also apply this approach when reporting progress towards the targets set in its Second NDC.

The anthropogenic emissions and removals in Samoas second GHG inventory were prepared in accordance with the methodologies and common metrics described in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. However, although the 2006 IPCC Guidelines provide a comprehensive overview and categorization of all potential sources of GHG emissions, not all of them are relevant to Samoa. In addition, although certain sources are relevant to Samoa, there is insufficient data to include them in the inventory. Samoa therefore also used the Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories as they better reflected national circumstances. Samoa is currently updating its GHG inventory, following the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National GHG Inventories, and the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for GHG Inventories, using the Tier 1 approach and applying default emission factors.

The anthropogenic emissions and removals in Samoas second GHG inventory were prepared in accordance with the methodologies and common metrics described in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. However, although the 2006 IPCC Guidelines provide a comprehensive overview and categorization of all potential sources of GHG emissions, not all of them are relevant to Samoa. In addition, although certain sources are relevant to Samoa, there is insufficient data to include them in the inventory. Samoa therefore also used the Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National GHG inventories as they better reflected national circumstances.

Sector-, category- or activity-specific assumptions, methodologies and approaches consistent with IPCC guidance, as appropriate, including, as applicable: i) Approach to addressing emissions and subsequent removals from natural disturbances on managed lands ii) Approach used to account for emissions and removals from harvested wood products iii) Approach used to address the effects of age- class structure in forests iv) Treatment of land sector The second GHG inventory estimates removals from the AFOLU sector. However, there was very limited data available to accurately estimate how changing land use patterns may be affecting CO2 emissions and removals. The estimate of CO2 removals from forests are based on 1999 satellite images and expert opinion about the trends in forest area in the years since. The estimates do account for changes in carbon stocks due to logging and fuelwood extraction, but do not account for possible conversions of forest land to grassland or cropland. This can only be done once up-to-date satellite images have been purchased, analyzed, and compared to the 1999 images. Samoa strives to report anthropogenic emissions or removals from AFOLU, following the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National GHG Inventories, and the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, using the Tier 1 approach and applying default emission factors. However, until additional work has been done, Samoas CO2 removal data must be treated with caution.

The anthropogenic emissions and removals in Samoas second GHG inventory were prepared in accordance with the methodologies and common metrics described in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. However, although the 2006 IPCC Guidelines provide a comprehensive overview and categorization of all potential sources of GHG emissions, not all of them are relevant to Samoa. In addition, although certain sources are relevant to Samoa, there is insufficient data to include them in the inventory. Samoa therefore also used the Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories as they better reflected national circumstances. Samoa is currently updating its GHG inventory, following the 2006 IPCC Guidelines and the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, using the Tier 1 approach and applying default emission factors.

Samoas Second Nationally Determined Contribution Samoas Second Nationally Determined Contribution ii) Whether the baseline scenario is static (will be fixed over the period) or dynamic The baseline scenario target is static (fixed over the period). Any changes will be accounted for qualitatively.

Samoas Second NDC contains quantitative greenhouse gas reduction targets in the energy, waste, and AFOLU, sectors. Given the lack of data on marine sector emissions, it was not possible to specify a numerical reduction target for emissions reductions in the marine sector. However, Samoa has set the target of expanding the area of mangrove forests by 5 percent by 2030 relative to 2018. This rests on the assumption that Samoas total mangrove area was 374 hectares (ha) in 2018.84 Increasing this area by 5 percent would require Samoa to plant 18.7 ha of new mangroves, while preventing any loss of current mangrove forests.

Not applicable. Samoas Second NDC does not include any climate forcers that are not covered by the IPCC guidelines.

Samoa intends to achieve the mitigation targets stated in its Second NDC through domestic efforts and actions, and it does not intend to use internationally traded credits to meet these targets. However, Samoa is interested in selling carbon credits to more developed countries that may be interested.

6. How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances a) How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances; Samoa is extremely vulnerable to climate change due to its geographic location, status as a SIDS, and the importance of natural resources to its main economic sectors of fisheries, agriculture, and tourism. Dealing with the impacts of climate change is made more challenging due to limited financial, technical, and human resources. However, Samoa recognizes the potential for reduction of its emissions to not only support global efforts and demonstrate its willingness to address climate change issues but also to support the governments development vision of improved quality of life for all. Accounting for these circumstances, Samoa considers its NDC as fair and ambitious.

The targets set in Samoas Second NDC represent a progression beyond Samoas First NDC in that it:  Sets a clear and transparent target for reducing overall GHG emissions in the following key sectors that were not included in the First NDC:  Waste  AFOLU  Sets clear and transparent targets for adaptation in the marine and AFOLU sectors.

Samoa has increased its ambition from its First NDC efforts by including an economy-wide emissions reduction target, as well as sector-specific emissions reduction and adaptation targets. Samoa will continue to revise these targets over time.

In alignment with its Second NDC, Samoa is currently preparing a Low Carbon Development Strategy covering the years 2020- 2030. This strategy is due to be launched in 2021.

How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2 a) How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2 As part of its Second NDC, and its NDC Implementation Roadmap and NDC Investment Plan (including project pipeline), Samoa has identified a clear and transparent target to reduce overall GHG emissions overall, and sector-specific targets to reduce emissions in the energy, waste, and AFOLU, sectors, and adaptation targets in the marine and AFOLU sectors. Samoa will strive to increase the ambition of its NDC over time by increasing its sector-specific targets when new mitigation and adaptation opportunities arise, and by including more detailed adaptation actions in future iterations. As part of the Second NDC, and its NDC Implementation Roadmap and NDC Investment Plan, Samoa has identified where financing and capacity building is required to achieve its targets.

As part of its Second NDC, and its NDC Implementation Roadmap and NDC Investment Plan, Samoa has identified a clear and transparent target to reduce overall GHG emissions and sector-specific targets in the energy, waste, and AFOLU sectors and adaptation targets in the marine and AFOLU sectors. Samoa will strive to increase the ambition of its NDC over time by increasing its sector-specific targets when new mitigation and adaptation opportunities arise. Samoa will continue to increase ambition in subsequent NDCs in a manner that allows for continued development and poverty reduction, and that accounts for Samoas national circumstances as a SIDS that is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Samoa will work with development partners and multilateral climate funds to pursue mitigation and adaptation actions that would be unaffordable in the absence of external support.

Samoas Second Nationally Determined Contribution Samoas Second Nationally Determined Contribution Appendix B: Summary of Samoas emissions profile Table 6.2 summarizes Samoas GHG emissions for 1994, 2000, and 2007. Table 6.2: Summary of Samoas GHG emissions in 1994, 2000, and 2007 Sector 1994 (Gg CO2e) 2000 (Gg CO2e) 2007 (Gg CO2e) Estimated GHG emissions Table 6.3 lists the sources of GHG emissions from the energy sector in 2007 by sub-sector. Land transport accounts for the majority of emissions from the energy sector, followed by electricity generation.

Land transport 95.02 54% Electricity generation 44.21 25% Manufacturing and construction Residential energy use 6.22 4% Fishing 5.70 3% Domestic shipping 5.51 3% Commercial and institutional 1.39 1% Total 174.35 100% Samoa included the following goal in its First NDC:

[Samoa is] committed to reducing its [greenhouse gas] GHG emissions from the Electricity sub-sector through the adoption of a 100% Renewable energy target for electricity generation through to the year 2025 The Government is committed to increasing the use of renewables for electricity generation to improve sustainability and strengthen Samoas energy sector. Reducing the use of fossil fuels can also have a significant economic benefit by reducing expenditure on fuel imports.

Some national mitigation projects have already been implemented, or are currently underway, that contribute to GHG emissions reductions in multiple sectors. For example, the passenger ferry, Lady Samoa III, recently had solar panels installed on the roof. There has also been an initiative to restore mangroves through the establishment of mangrove conservation areas.

Limited financial capability and other constraints are hindering Samoas ability to make faster progress in reducing emissions.86 Samoa is not on track to achieve the targets set in its First NDC. Reaching 100 percent renewable electricity generation in 2017 and maintaining this through 2025 would have reduced operational emissions from the electricity sector to zero. However, the renewable energy percentage in electricity generation in Samoa in 2021 was 50 percent.87 This is an increase in renewable energy share by 24 percentage points (from 26 percent in 2014).

Although the share of renewable energy has increased, total electricity generation also increased from 126,800 MWh in 2014 to 132,000 MWh in 2019.85 This increase in generation partially offsets the reduction in GHG emissions from increased renewable energy because fossil fuels are still used for electricity generation. At present, estimated operational emissions in the electricity sector is 48,225 tCO2e per annum.88 Assuming the emissions intensity of non-renewable electricity production remained constant, estimated emissions from the electricity sector decreased by 12 percent between 2014 and 2019.

The First NDC does not include specific goals for any sector other than electricity. Samoas First NDC indicates significant potential to reduce emissions in sectors other than electricity, such as transport (land and maritime), waste, tourism, marine, and forestry sectors. However, it does not specify how this should be done, nor does it set targets for these other sectors.

GHG emissions reductions across all sectors were framed as being conditional on Samoa receiving external financial assistance from the international community. The First NDC did not specify the projects or policies required to realize GHG emissions reductions in sectors other than electricity.

Opportunities in each priority sector will help determine new GHG emission targets for Samoas Second NDC There is a lack of information on the current levels of GHG emissions in each priority sector energy (including electricity, transport (land and maritime)), waste, tourism, marine, and AFOLU. The Third National Communication and First Biennial Update Report (BUR) is currently under development, however preliminary findings are not yet available, and are not expected until the second half of 2021. The report will include an updated national Greenhouse Gas Inventory.

Samoas Second Nationally Determined Contribution Samoas Second Nationally Determined Contribution While Samoas First NDC mentioned adaptation, it focused explicitly on mitigation Samoas First NDC includes a brief section mentioning the need for adaptation to climate change. In this section, Samoa highlights the work done to develop Samoas NAPA,89 notes that some progress has been made, and emphasizes the need to build on this work leveraging external financial support. However, Samoas First NDC does not set any specific targets for adaptation, and the adaptation section of the document explicitly states that the focus of the First NDC is on mitigation.

The base year for this NDC is defined by the Government of Samoa as 2007. The most recent GHG inventory for Samoa was completed in 2007, and this contains the most recent estimates of emissions disaggregated by sector. While a new emissions inventory for Samoa is currently being developed, this will not be ready until after Samoa needs to submit its Second NDC to the UNFCCC ahead of COP26 in Glasgow in 2021. Therefore, the Government of Samoa communicates this Second NDC based on the 2007 GHG emissions inventory.

Number of projects that can be implemented concurrently in each sector Stakeholders detailed the number of projects that could be implemented at the same time in each sector, summarized in Table D.1. This feedback is informed by institutional constraints and context in each sector, such as financial limitations, human capacity constraints, and experience implementing GHG mitigation projects. This feedback was important when sequencing possible GHG mitigation projects90 and enabled reasonable targets to be assigned to each sector.

Table D.1: Number of projects that can be implemented at the same time in each sector Number of projects that can be implemented at the same time (feedback from survey)91 Electricity 5-6 Land transport 3-4 Maritime transport 3-4 Waste 3-4 Tourism 1-2 Marine 1-2 AFOLU 1-2 Institutions and their capacity to implement GHG mitigation projects Stakeholders detailed the capacity of key institutions to implement GHG mitigation projects, detailed in Table D.2. The number of full-time staff equivalent (FTE)92 is calculated from the number of staff available and amount of time (in hours) each staff member has available to manage mitigation projects per week.

Table D.2: Key institutions and their capacity to implement GHG mitigation projects Electric Power Corporation (EPC) 0.4 Land Transport Authority (LTA) 0.4 Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (MAF) 0.4 Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Labour (MCIL) 0.15 Ministry of Finance (MoF) 0.8 Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MNRE) 2.0 Ministry of Works, Transport and Infrastructure (MWTI) 2.0 Samoa Bureau of Statistics (SBS) 0.4 Samoa Police Services (SPS) 2.093 Samoa Shipping Corporation (SCS) 0.4 Samoa Tourism Authority (STA) 0.4 Samoa Water Authority (SWA) 2.094 Stakeholders provided feedback on the prioritization of possible GHG mitigation projects, using a score from 1 to 5 (in which 1 indicates they think the project should receive the lowest priority and 5 indicates they think the project should receive the highest priority). This prioritization ensured that local expert advice was at the forefront of Samoas pipeline of mitigation projects.97 93 Available staff work in supporting services, such as the policy and planning, finance, and assets unit, rather than Police Officers themselves. 94 Number of FTE at SWA is an estimate based on information from SWA about number of staff available to assist with implementing climate change mitigation projects. 95 Number of FTE at SROS is an estimate based on information from SROS about number of staff available to assist with implementing climate change mitigation projects. 96 Number of FTE at SPREP is an estimate based on information from SPREP about number of staff available to assist with implementing climate change mitigation projects. 97 The pipeline of mitigation projects can be found in Samoas NDC Implementation Roadmap and NDC Investment Plan.

