1. Introduction Nepal is among the most vulnerable countries to climate change. It is at high-risk due to the countrys fragile topography, the climate-sensitive livelihoods of the people and their limited adaptive capacity. Nepal is committed to acting on climate change in line with the Paris Agreement, despite the countrys negligible emissions. It is because efforts to limit global average temperature rise to 1.5C would result in significantly lower risks for Nepal when compared to 2C or higher. These risks are in addition to the existing impacts and vulnerabilities of climate change in the country. Nepal, therefore, calls on all Parties to increase ambition and move collectively onto emission reduction pathways consistent with the Paris Agreement's 1.5C warming limit.

Contribution (NDC) under the Paris Agreement for the period 2021-2030, following Articles 4.2 and 4.11 of the Paris Agreement, and Decision 1/CP.21 paragraph 23 and 24, and other relevant provisions of the Paris Agreement. The NDC takes into account the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, in light of national circumstances.

Nepal envisions achieving socio-economic prosperity by building a climate-resilient society. To this end, the country has developed its policy and institutional framework. In accordance with Article 4, paragraph 19 of the Paris Agreement, Nepal is formulating a long-term low greenhouse gas emission development strategy by 2021. The strategy aims to achieve net-zero greenhouse gas emission by 2050.

Type Activity-based targets and policy targets in key sectors, including emissions reduction in some sectors The targets in this section, unless otherwise specified, are conditional upon international support. Coverage Energy; Industrial Processes and Product Use (IPPU); Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU); and Waste Timeframe From 1st January 2021- 31st December 2030 Single year target  2030, including updates on 2025 targets  By 2030, expand clean energy generation from approximately 1,400 MW to 15,000 MW, of which 5-10 % will be generated from mini and micro-hydro power, solar, wind and bio-energy. Of this, 5,000 MW is an unconditional target. The remainder is dependent upon the provision of funding by the international community.

By 2030, ensure 15% of the total energy demand is supplied from clean energy sources.

Sales of electric vehicles (e-vehicles) in 2025 will be 25% of all private passenger vehicles sales, including two-wheelers and 20% of all four-wheeler public passenger vehicle sales (this public passenger target does not take into account electric- rickshaws and electric-tempos) in 2025. Due to this e-vehicle sales target, fossil fuel energy demand for the transportation sector will decrease from approximately 40 million GJ in the Business As Usual (BAU) scenario in 2025 to 36 million GJ. This would be around a 9% decrease in fossil fuel dependency. This target will reduce emissions from a projected BAU of 2,988 Gg CO2 eq. in 2025 to 2,734 Gg CO2 eq., which is around 8% decrease in emissions.

By 2030, increase sales of e-vehicles to cover 90% of all private passenger vehicle sales, including two-wheelers and 60% of all four-wheeler public passenger vehicle sales (the public passenger target does not take into account electric-rickshaws and electric-tempos). As a consequence, energy demand for fossil fuels will decrease from approximately 48 million GJ in the 2030 BAU scenario to 34.5 million GJ, which is around 28% decrease in fossil fuel dependency. This target will reduce emissions from a projected BAU of 3,640 Gg CO2 eq. in 2030 to 2,619 Gg CO2 eq., which is around 28% decrease in emissions.

By 2030, develop 200 km of the electric rail network to support public commuting and mass transportation of goods.

By 2030, ensure 25% of households use electric stoves as their primary mode of cooking.

By 2025, install 500,000 improved cookstoves, specifically in rural areas.

By 2025, install an additional 200,000 household biogas plants and 500 large scale biogas plants (institutional/industrial/ municipal/community).

These three combined targets can reduce emissions from approximately 1,999 Gg CO2 eq. in BAU in 2025 to approximately 1,774 Gg CO2 eq. This is around 11% reduction in emissions from the cooking sector. For 2030, these three targets can reduce emissions from approximately 2,064 Gg CO2 eq. from BAU to 1,599 Gg CO2 eq., which is around 23% reduction in emissions.

By 2030, maintain 45% of the total area of the country under forest cover (including other wooded land limited to less than 4%).

By 2030, manage 50% of Tarai and Inner Tarai forests and 25% of middle hills and mountain forests sustainably, including through the use of funding from REDD+ initiatives.

Waste  By 2025, 380 million litres/day of wastewater will be treated before being discharged, and 60,000 cubic meters/year of faecal sludge will be managed. These two activities will reduce around 258 Gg CO2 eq. compared to BAU.

1. Quantified information on the reference point, including, as appropriate, a base year a Reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s) Nepal's NDC comprises of sectoral activity-based targets. As per the Greenhouse Gas Inventory, prepared for the Third National Communication (TNC), the net GHG emissions of 31,998.91 Gg CO2 eq. was estimated for Nepal in the base year 2011. The direct GHG emission for the following sectors are:

Energy: 14713.36 Gg CO2 eq. IPPU: 379.80 Gg CO2 eq. AFOLU: 15982.16 Gg CO2 eq. Waste: 923.59 Gg CO2 eq.

1 Information to facilitate Clarity, Transparency and Understanding (ICTU) Guidelines indicators, their values in the reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s), and, as applicable, in the target year generation is approximately 1400MW, mainly from hydropower. Nepal categorizes mini and micro- hydropower (i.e. hydropower of less than 1MW capacity) and solar and wind as renewable energy.

Current energy demand satisfied by clean energy sources is well below 15%.

The current share of electric vehicles is approximately 1%.

Currently, around 5% of households use electric induction stoves, either as their primary or secondary mode of cooking.

Currently, emission standards are not in place for emissions in the brick and cement industries.

Currently, 2.1 % of wastewater and less than 1% of the faecal sludge is treated.

Nepal's 2016 NDC sets a target to maintain 40% of the total area of the country under forest cover.

Current forest cover is approximately 44.74% of which 4.38% is another wooded land (OWL).

The current soil organic matter content of agricultural land is 2%.

The number of the organic fertilizer production plant is 23.

The number of improved cattle shed is 100,000.

c. For strategies, plans and actions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement, or policies and measures as components of nationally determined contributions where paragraph 1(b) above is not applicable, The targets in this section, unless specified, are all conditional upon international support and will be implemented by 2030. Energy  By 2030, increase the reliable supply of clean energy, ensuring access to all.

Increase the quantity (kWh), quality, reliability, and affordability of electricity access from renewable sources.

Strengthen transmission and distribution links to support upscaling of e-cooking, e-heating, e- transport and charging stations.

Develop enabling environment to provide power to small and mid-size enterprises (SMEs) using distributed renewable energy generation sources.

Promote public electric mobility through policy incentives, including subsidy policies and other financial mechanisms.

By 2025, ensure at least three provinces operate electric public transport, three provinces establish vehicle fitness test centres to monitor and regulate vehicular emissions, and all metropolitan cities have roads paved with bicycle and pedestrian lanes.

Forests under community-based management will comprise at least 60% of Nepals forest area; management committees will have 50% women representation and proportional representation of Dalits and Indigenous People in key posts.

By 2030, institutional mechanisms and structures in place and adequate provision of budget to ensure social and environmental safeguards including Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC); forest tenure and access to finance and technology for Local Communities, women and Indigenous People.

Ensure fair and equitable benefits (carbon and non-carbon) from sustainable forest management, watershed management, and biodiversity- conservation among Local Communities, women and Indigenous People.

By 2030, upgrade watershed health and vitality in at least 20 districts to a higher condition category.

By 2030, create an inventory of wetlands in Nepal and sustainably manage vulnerable wetlands.  By 2025, enhance the sink capacity of the land- use sector by instituting the Forest Development Fund (FDF) for compensation of plantations and forest restoration.

Increase growing stock including Mean Annual Increment in Tarai, Hills and Mountains.

Afforest/reforest viable public and private lands, including agroforestry.

Restore and manage degraded forest land, including in the Chure region.

By 2030, soil organic matter content of agriculture land will reach to 3.95%.

By 2030, mulberry and fruit orchard areas will be expanded to 6,000 ha.

By 2030, the number of additional improved cattle sheds will reach to 5,00,000 for quality farm-yard manure production and use.

By 2030, the number of organic fertilizer production plants in the country will reach 100.

Integrate climate change in the upcoming revised Agriculture Policy.

By 2025, update the Rangeland Policy and develop plans for the sustainable management of rangelands.

By 2030, establish 200 climate-smart villages and 500 climate-smart farms.

Promote intercropping, agroforestry, conservation tillage, and livestock and agricultural waste management.

Ensure increased access of climate-smart agricultural technologies to women, Indigenous People, smallholder farmers and marginalized groups.

Protect, promote and support climate-resilient indigenous seeds/crop varieties through community seed banks and national gene banks.

By 2030, adopt low emission technologies in brick and cement industries to reduce coal consumption and air pollution, including through the development and/or enactment of emission standards.

By 2025, formulate guidelines and establish mechanisms to monitor emissions from large industries.

By 2030, create an enabling environment for both public and private sector to treat industrial and municipal waste, including faecal sludge.

By 2030, adopt and implement waste segregation, recycling and waste-to-energy programs in at least 100 municipalities.

By 2030, the burning of healthcare waste in 1,400 healthcare facilities will be prohibited by proper management of healthcare waste through the application of non-burn technologies.  Promote the 3Rs (Reduce, Reuse, Recycle) approach to waste management, along with source segregation and management of degradable and non-degradable waste.

Focus on co-production of energy and organic fertilizer from solid waste, wastewater and faecal sludge.

By 2025, formulate and implement nature-based tourism plans in at least five main tourist destinations.

By 2030, ensure at least five tourist destinations are carbon neutral.

By 2030, including measures in policies to offset the carbon footprint of emissions resulting from tourism transport.

Adopt national building codes and prepare Integrated Urban Development Plans (IUDPs) emphasizing low carbon and climate-resilient urban settlements in all municipalities.

By 2025, revise the urban environment management guidelines to incorporate activities related to promoting low carbon and climate- resilient urban settlements.

Gender Equality and Social Inclusion (GESI) By 2030, develop an Action Plan for integrating GESI in achieving NDC targets.

Develop specific programs with dedicated resources (human and financial) to ensure full, equal and meaningful participation of women, children, youth, Indigenous Peoples and marginalized groups in climate change-related policy development; and during the planning, monitoring and implementation processes at local, provincial and national levels.

Promote the leadership, participation and negotiation capacity of women, Indigenous Peoples and youth in climate change forums.

Ensure gender-disaggregated data when reporting on progress and achievements. d. Target relative to the reference indicator, expressed numerically, for example in percentage or amount of reduction See NDC and section 1b.

Greenhouse Gas Inventory prepared for the Third National Communication.

f. Information on the circumstances under which the Party may update the values of the reference indicators In the next Greenhouse Gas Inventory, Nepal may update the reference indicators of existing sectors and/or may provide new values for sectors not previously covered. Nepal will update the values of reference indicators in such cases.

a. Time frame and/or period for implementation, including start and end date, consistent with any further relevant decision adopted by the CMA;

From 1st January 2021- 31st December 2030.

b. Whether it is a single- year or multi-year target, as applicable.

Single year target  2030, including updates on 2025 targets.

a. General description of the target;

Sectoral activity-based and policy targets, including emissions reduction in some sectors. The Government of Nepal will meet unconditional targets from its resources. Conditional targets are dependent on international support on financing, technology transfer and/or capacity building.

b. Sectors, gases, categories and pools covered by the nationally determined contribution, including, as applicable, consistent with IPCC guidelines;

Gases:

c. How the Party has taken into consideration paragraphs 31(c) and (d) of decision 1/CP.21;

The detailed assessment carried out during the NDC formulation process concluded that the data needed to define targets and to rigorously assess the impact of policies and actions on emissions for all sectors was not available. Nepal will extend the scope of the coverage of its NDC overtime to all categories of anthropogenic emissions and removals, as more robust data becomes available.

d. Mitigation co-benefits resulting from Parties adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans, including a description of specific projects, measures and initiatives of Parties adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans.

Not applicable.

a. Information on the planning processes that the Party undertook to prepare its NDC and, if available, on the Partys implementation plans, including, as appropriate:

i. Domestic institutional arrangements, public participation and engagement with local communities and indigenous people, in a gender- responsive manner;

The NDC was developed through an inclusive and participatory process, with a series of consultations at national and provincial levels. Nepals NDC formulation was a country-driven process following the principle of Leave No One Behind (LNOB). A team of experts reviewed overarching and sectoral policies, strategies and programs; and coordinated the process of gathering data and performing analysis. These assessments were later verified through in-person and virtual consultations both at national and provincial levels with line ministries, experts, Local Peoples, women, Indigenous Peoples and youth. The reviewed targets served as inputs for the technical work, such as the Low Emissions Analysis Platform (LEAP) modelling for building scenarios and projections. The output of the technical work and inputs from consultations were further reviewed and verified by the NDC Working Committee, established by the Ministry of Forests and Environment and comprising representatives from government agencies and relevant experts. Furthermore, the NDC was discussed at the Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee on Climate Change (IMCCCC) and shared with respective line ministries and civil society organizations for formal input. Finally, it was submitted to the Cabinet for approval.

ii. Contextual matters, including, inter alia, as appropriate:

(a) National circumstances, such as geography, climate, economy, sustainable development and poverty eradication; Nepal is a landlocked country that lies in the southern face of the Himalayan mountain range. The country is located between 260 22' and 300 27' North latitude and 800 04' and 880 12' East longitude and covers an area of 147,181 square kilometres. Physiographic regions within the country include High Himal, High Mountain, Middle Mountain, Siwalik, and the Tarai. Within these regions, elevations range from 59 meters to 8,848 meters. Nepals climate is influenced by the Himalayan mountain range and the South Asian Monsoon. The climate has four distinct seasons: pre-monsoon (March-May), monsoon (June-September), post-monsoon (October- November) and winter (December-February).

Nepal is a Least Developed Country (LDC) whose economy mostly depends on agriculture and remittances. Nepals per capita GDP was USD 1,085 in the fiscal year 2019/2020 with a growth rate of 7.5% from the last fiscal year. However, the impact of COVID- 19 is already bringing these numbers down. In the past two decades, the proportion of Nepali people living in absolute material poverty has more than halved from 49% in 1992 to 23% in 2015. Rates of child and maternal mortality reduced significantly as well. Primary school enrolment now exceeds 96% and has gender parity. Average life expectancy at birth has crossed 70 years. Nepals pace of development has been one of the highest in the world. The latest Multi- dimensional Poverty Index (MPI) shows that 28.6% of the population is still low. This means their lives are impacted by several deprivations simultaneously. However, It also reveals that Nepal halved its official MPI between 2006 and 2014. Building on the relative success of the Millennium Development Goals, Nepal is committed to pursuing and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030, including the target set by the Sendai Framework on Disaster Risk Reduction. These global ambitions are broadly aligned with the social, economic, environmental and risk reduction aspirations that Nepal has set for itself in its new constitution.

(b) Best practices and experience related to the preparation of the NDC;

(c) Other contextual aspirations and priorities acknowledged when joining the Paris Agreement;

The provision in the Paris Agreement to limit global average temperature rise to 1.5C results in lower risks for Nepal when compared to 2C or higher temperatures Nepals commitment to reduce national GHG emission levels will require international support on financing, technology transfer and/or capacity building. Furthermore, Nepal aspires to avoid the residual risks caused by Loss and Damage and to receive financial and any other support for the risks that may still materialize.

b. Specific information Not applicable.

c. How the Partys preparation of its NDC has been informed by the outcomes of the global stocktake, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreement;

The first global stocktake will take place in 2023. Nepal organized the Talanoa Dialogue in 2018, which generated political momentum for enhanced climate action, including a call for Parties to update their NDCs. Nepals new NDC is more ambitious than its previous one, both in terms of its sectoral coverage (through the inclusion of land-use change and forestry, energy, and waste) and in terms of its net emission reduction contribution.

d. Each Party with an NDC under Article 4 of the Paris Agreement that consists of adaptation action and/or economic diversification plans resulting in mitigation co-benefits consistent with Article 4, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement to submit information on:

Not Applicable.

i. How the economic and social consequences of response measures have been considered in developing the NDC;

Not Applicable.

Not Applicable.

5. Assumptions and methodological approaches, including those for estimating and accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and, as appropriate, removals:

a. Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals corresponding to the Partys nationally determined contribution, consistent with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 31, and accounting guidance adopted by the CMA;

Nepal will account for its anthropogenic GHG emissions and removals using the 2006 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. Two additional guidelines will be considered for quality assurance:

The IPCC Good Practice Guidance and Uncertainty Management in National GHG Inventory (2000)  The IPCC Good Practice Guideline for Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry (2003). b. Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for the implementation of policies and measures or strategies in the See 5(a) above. Nepal will also apply specific assumptions and methodologies where relevant when accounting for various policies and measures in its Biennial Update Report, Biennial Transparency Report, or National Communication.

c. If applicable, information on how the Party will take into account existing methods and guidance under the Convention to account for anthropogenic emissions and removals, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 14, of the Paris Agreement, as appropriate;

See 5 (a) above. The IPCC 2006 Guidelines has been used to calculate emissions in the GHG Inventory of Nepals Third National Communication. d. IPCC methodologies and metrics used for estimating anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals;

See 5(a) above. Nepals emissions will be derived by using the Tier 1 (and in a few cases Tier II) methodologies of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. e. Sector-, category- or activity-specific assumptions, methodologies and approaches consistent with IPCC guidance, as appropriate, including, as applicable:

Due to limited data availability, not all sectors are covered in Nepals NDC. In the future, Nepal would like to update its emission inventories, develop emission factors for all sectors following the 2006 IPCC guidelines, carry out modelling to build sector-specific scenarios and projections, establish a mechanism to collect, store and maintain datasets and account for conditional targets that require financial, capacity building and technical support.

i. Approach to addressing emissions and subsequent removals from natural disturbances on managed lands;

See (e) above.

ii. Approach used to account for emissions and removals from harvested wood products;

Not applicable.

iii. Approach used to address the effects of age-class structure in forests;

Not applicable.

f. Other assumptions and methodological approaches used for understanding the nationally determined contribution and, if applicable, estimating corresponding emissions and removals, including: i. How the reference indicators, baseline(s) and/or reference level(s), including, where applicable, sector-, category- or activity- specific reference levels, are constructed, including, for example, key parameters, assumptions, definitions, methodologies, data sources and models used;

Not applicable.

ii. For Parties with nationally determined contributions that contain non-greenhouse-gas components, information on assumptions and methodological approaches used in relation to those components, as applicable;

Not applicable.

iii. For climate forcers included in nationally determined contributions not covered by IPCC guidelines, information on how the climate forcers are estimated;

Not applicable.

iv. Further technical information, as necessary;

Not applicable.

g. The intention to use voluntary cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, if applicable. Nepal may explore potential markets that allow higher mitigation ambition while promoting sustainable development and environmental integrity.

a. How the Party considers that its NDC is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances; Nepal is a Least Developed Country with an insignificant contribution to past and current global emissions. Nevertheless, Nepal recognizes that to meet the 1.5C temperature goal, all countries need to undertake ambitious mitigation actions. This NDC and accompanying information reflect Nepals commitment under the Paris Agreement to address climate change.

b. Fairness considerations, including reflecting on equity;

See above, 6 (a).

c. How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 3, of the Paris Agreement;

This NDC broadens the ambition of the 2016 NDC, both in terms of sectoral coverage and net emission reduction contribution.

d. How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement;

In addition to the sectoral activity-based targets for transport, cooking, forestry and waste sectors, the 2020 NDC also includes policy targets for sectors where data and/or baseline information is not available such as for electric railroads, solid waste management and industries. This paves the way for Nepal to establish an economy-wide emissions target, based on national circumstances and capabilities.

e. How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement.

In addition to sectoral activity-based targets, Nepals 2020 NDC also includes policy targets (See section 1(d)) for areas where data and/or baseline information is not available. These areas include electric railroads, solid waste management and industries.

7. How the NDC contributes towards achieving the objectives of the Convention as set out in its Article 2 a. How the NDC contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2;

See above, 6 (a).

b. How the NDC contributes towards Article 2, paragraph 1(a), and Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Paris Agreement.

See above, 6 (a) and 7(a).

As per Article 7.10 and 7.11 of the Paris Agreement, Nepal will submit an adaptation communication, which will include its priorities, implementation and support needs, plans and actions through the National Adaptation Plan (NAP). The NAP will outline Agreement and the required means of implementation to implement that contribution fully.

Nepal is at high-risk to the effects of climate change. Thus, adaptation will be a constant requirement for the country. Adaptation priorities and actions, as per the National Climate Change Policy (2019), adopt an integrated approach to cover climate-sensitive sectors exemplifying the inter-sectoral nature of the responses. The adaptation priorities cover eight thematic and four cross-cutting areas.

The thematic areas are:

Agriculture and Food Security;

Forests, Biodiversity and Watershed Conservation;

Water Resources and Energy;

Rural and Urban Settlements;

Industry, Transport and Physical Infrastructure;

Tourism, Natural and Cultural Heritage;

Health, Drinking Water and Sanitation;

Disaster Risk Reduction and Management.

The cross-cutting areas are:

Gender Equality and Social Inclusion (GESI), Livelihoods and Governance;

Awareness Raising and Capacity Building;

Research, Technology Development and Extension;

Climate Finance Management.

Nepal will accelerate adaptation by implementing the National Environment Policy (2019), National Climate Change Policy (2019), Environment Protection Act (2019), Disaster Risk Reduction National Strategic Plan of Action 2018  2030, Fifteenth Plan (2019/2020-2023/2024), and other national strategies and action plans. The key policy priorities of Nepal, on adaptation, include the following:

By 2030, all 753 local governments will prepare and implement climate-resilient and disaster vulnerability and risks and prioritize adaptation and disaster risk communities and people residing in climate-vulnerable geographical areas.

The National Adaptation Plan (NAP) will be updated every ten years. Likewise, a National level Vulnerability and Risk Assessment (VRA) will be carried out every five years to inform climate resource allocation policies.

Resilient Planning and Budgeting Guidelines will be formulated.

By 2030, the population with access to the basic water supply will increase from to 40%.

System, will be strengthened and established.

Management will be formulated.

Nepal is in the process of developing its National Adaptation Plan (NAP). Through this process, Nepal intends to implement medium and long-term adaptation needs, including urgent and immediate priorities. Key outputs of NAP include the following:

The NAP will be formulated by 2021. It will incorporate adaptation and resilience and long-term (by 2050).

By 2025, a Climate Information System will be established and operationalized.

The cost of achieving Nepal's NDC conditional mitigation targets is estimated to be USD 25 billion. The cost of achieving unconditional targets outlined in the NDC is estimated to be USD 3.4 billion. This estimate only covers activity-based targets and does not include the cost of policies, measures and actions. The cost of achieving the adaptation component will be detailed in the upcoming National Adaptation Plan (NAP).

To achieve the conditional targets, Nepal anticipates financial, technological and capacity-building support from global funds such as the Green Climate Fund, Global bilateral/multilateral agencies and development partners. These funds will be utilized to bolster limited national resources and technical capacities for scaling up climate action.

The activities will be implemented for 10 years (2021-2030) by integrating them under the fiscal budget as various subsidy policies, projects or programs. As these targets are well aligned with the countrys existing policies and plans, they will have high ownership and will be implemented on time at the national and sub-national levels. The key elements during implementation include:

Nepal will prepare a detailed NDC implementation framework/roadmap/plan to ensure framework/roadmap/plan include:

MRV purposes.

Climate Change Coordination Committees.

Indigenous Peoples and youth.

