SINGAPORES SECOND UPDATE OF ITS FIRST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION (NDC) ACCOMPANYING INFORMATION2 ON SINGAPORES 1ST NDC 1. Quantifiable information on the reference point (including, as appropriate, a base year):

Emissions level (in terms of CO2e) in 2030:

Singapores 2030 emissions will be demonstrated in the national greenhouse gas (GHG) inventory time series reported in its Biennial Transparency Reports.

Not applicable. Singapores NDC is an economy-wide absolute GHG emissions limitation target.

See 1(a) above.

Not applicable. Singapores NDC is an economy-wide absolute GHG emissions limitation target.

Not applicable. Singapores NDC target, which aims to peak and subsequently reduce emissions to an absolute emissions level, does not take reference from any baseline.

2. Time frames and/or periods for implementation:

Paris Agreement (CMA);

Beginning 2021 to end 2030.

Single-year target.

3. Scope and coverage:

Singapores NDC is an economy-wide absolute GHG emissions limitation target to reduce its GHG emissions to around 60 MtCO2e in 2030 after peaking emissions earlier.

Singapores NDC is an economy-wide absolute GHG emissions limitation target.

Key sectors covered:

Energy, Industrial Processes and Product Use, Agriculture, Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) and Waste.

Greenhouse gases covered:

Not applicable. Singapore will account for any mitigation co-benefits from adaptation actions and/or economic diversification as mitigation actions in accordance with the assumptions and methodological approaches indicated in Section 5 of this document.

4. Planning processes:

The Inter-Ministerial Committee on Climate Change (IMCCC), chaired by a Senior Minister and comprising Ministers from relevant Ministries, drives Singapores whole-of-government efforts to develop and implement coherent and coordinated climate change 3 NF3 was included in the GHG coverage as part of the first update to Singapores first NDC in 2020.

The NDC was prepared taking into account Singapores national circumstances, challenges and opportunities for mitigation. Studies and technology roadmaps, developed in collaboration and consultation with industry stakeholders, academic experts and technical consultants, served as additional inputs on the potential of future technologies for long-term mitigation in Singapore. The Singapore Government also carried out stakeholder consultations, including with members of the public, to obtain feedback on possible measures to reduce carbon emissions.

Singapores national circumstances include, inter alia, a small low-lying land area, high population density, constraints in deploying clean energy, an export-oriented economy that is highly dependent on international trade, and climate vulnerabilities. Please refer to Section 6 for more details.

In Singapores experience, a key best practice arrangements to coordinate domestic climate efforts. In particular, the IMCCCs role in contribution;

NDC target which is outlined in the Singapore Green Plan 2030.

To achieve the NDC target, a whole-of-nation effort is needed. As part of the Singapore will continue to engage stakeholders (including businesses, civil society, youths, schools, and the research community) to co-create and co- encourage a whole-of-nation effort to address climate change.

Singapores climate strategies are reflected, inter alia, in the National Climate Change Blueprint 2015, Singapore's Climate Action Plan: Take Action Today, for a Sustainable respective government agencies.

Paris Agreement;

Singapore recognises the need for sustainable supporter of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Desertification.

Not applicable. Singapore is not part of any joint fulfilment agreement under Article 4, paragraph 2 of the Paris Agreement.

Paris Agreement;

Dialogue in 2018, which generated political momentum for enhanced climate action, including calling for Parties to update their NDCs. The preparation of Singapores second update of its first NDC was informed by the recommendations of the Talanoa Call for Action, and scientific literature such as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)s Sixth Assessment Report, taking into account Singapores national circumstances.

Not applicable. Please refer to Section 3(d) above.

Not applicable. Please refer to Section 3(d) above as well as to Singapores first Adaptation Communications, which is submitted as a component of its 5th National Communication, Chapter 4 on Vulnerability and Adaptation Measures.

Singapore will account for its anthropogenic GHG emissions and removals using the 2006 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, IPCC Good Practice Guidance and Uncertainty Management in National Greenhouse Gas Inventories and 2013 Supplement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Wetlands (collectively, the 2006 IPCC Guidelines), specifically, by way of the Sectoral approach.

See 5(a) above. Singapore will also apply specific assumptions and methodologies, where relevant, when accounting for progress of various policies and measures in its Biennial Update Report or Biennial Transparency Report.

See 5(a) above.

Singapores emissions for CO2, CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs, SF6 and NF3 will be derived using the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, via the Sectoral approach. The Tier 1 methodology will be used for most emissions estimates.

Higher tier methodology will be used, where relevant and depending on availability of data.

The aggregation of GHG emissions and removals will be reported using the 100-year time- horizon global warming potential (GWP) values from the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report.4 applicable:

Singapore will account for reporting of GHG emissions and removals from the LULUCF sector in accordance with the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, up to Tier 3 level where available to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Wetlands will also be incorporated. Singapore will continue to enhance and streamline its methodologies as well as incorporate new technology where relevant and applicable.

GHG emissions and removals from natural disturbances, if any, will be accounted for in accordance with the prescribed 2006 IPCC Guidelines, coupled with field inventory measurements where applicable.

Second Assessment Report.

Not applicable. There is no timber industry in Singapore. Hence, Singapore at present has no GHG emissions and removals from harvested wood products.

Singapore will estimate GHG emissions and removals in the LULUCF sector with up to Tier 3 approaches where feasible, and apply very high-resolution satellite images, coupled with collection of country-specific data resulting from field inventory measurements undertaken at regular intervals and estimated by modelling approaches. The field measurements will take into consideration tree growth information across the range of tree species and diameter classes.

To develop the NDC, extensive technical studies were undertaken, including an assessment of Singapores economy-wide mitigation potential. These take into account Singapores national circumstances and challenges (as outlined in Section 6 below). Studies and technology roadmaps developed in collaboration with industry stakeholders, academic experts and technical consultants, served as additional inputs on the potential of future technologies for long-term mitigation in Singapore. Stakeholder consultations were also carried out to obtain feedback on possible measures to reduce carbon emissions.

Not applicable. The scope and coverage of Singapores NDC, as indicated in Section 3(b) above, do not contain non-GHG components.

Not applicable. The scope and coverage of Singapores NDC, as indicated in Section 3(b) above, do not include climate forcers not covered by IPCC guidelines.

Nil.

Agreement, if applicable.

Singapore intends to achieve the mitigation objectives under its NDC primarily through cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement. This includes the use of internationally transferred mitigation outcomes (ITMOs), guided by Decision 2/CMA.3 Parties to the Paris Agreement, as well as the need to ensure environmental integrity. national circumstances:

The second update of Singapores first NDC and the accompanying information reflect Singapores commitment under the Paris Agreement in support of the multilateral framework of cooperation to address climate change.

2030 targets in their NDCs as necessary to align with the Paris Agreement temperature Paris Agreement, Singapores second update of its first NDC builds on the enhancements of the first update in 2020, and has been updated with a more ambitious goal to reduce emissions to around 60 MtCO2e in 2030 after peaking emissions earlier. This will entail is a challenging and ambitious target given Singapores national circumstances. Nevertheless, Singapore will press ahead with this ambitious goal to do its part in the global effort to address climate change.

Consideration of the fairness and ambition of Singapores NDC must take into account the following:

Singapore. Singapore is monitoring newer technologies and will assess their suitability for deployment. Such circumstances are recognised under Article 4, paragraph 10 of the Convention;

(PV) deployment and for Singapores forests to be a significant carbon sink; d) Singapore is a very open economy and is dependent on the global supply chain for food and energy. As one of the most globalised economies and a trading nation with no natural resources, Singapore is heavily dependent on the global supply chain for its food and energy. Its economic activity and emissions are also highly sensitive to the volatility of regional and global developments and escalating climate impacts. These challenges mean that Singapores climate strategies have to respond to international developments that may affect its economy, water, food, and energy, including preparing Singapore to be more climate resilient;

Singapores share of the global GDP is small at 0.4%, as an advanced manufacturing hub it plays a key role to meet the demands of the region and the world, accounting for 2.1% of the worlds total merchandise exports.5 Energy efficiency is a key strategy for emissions reduction and Singapore aims to produce goods in an energy- and carbon-efficient manner. As energy is not subsidised in Singapore, companies are incentivised to use energy judiciously and embrace new energy efficient technologies. Strong pollution control laws also encourage industries to switch to cleaner fuel sources such as natural gas. The Singapore Government facilitates the adoption of energy efficiency and emissions reduction technologies through grants and other policy tools to overcome high upfront capital investments and other non- market barriers. Singapore is already among the 20 best-performing countries in terms of emissions intensity.6 This reflects the substantial early action Singapore has taken to grow in an environmentally responsible way. This provides Singapore with a strong foundation to continue to strive for sustainable growth. Singapore is continuing to invest significantly in research and development to harness the potential of low-carbon technologies and explore effective international cooperation;

5 Source: World Trade Organization, Trade Profiles 2022  Singapore. 6 Source: International Energy Agency (IEA), World CO2 Indicators (2022).

2030. This will contribute around 3% of Singapores total electricity demand in 2030. Singapore is also deploying Energy Storage System (ESS) with 200MWh of energy storage capacity and 200MW of discharge capacity, to enhance the resilience of its energy supply and power grid.

While this level of renewable energy cannot match those of countries with abundant land for solar PV deployment and access to alternative energy resources, Singapores context and constraints must be taken into account. 2 GWp of solar would require between 10 and 20 km2 of space, out of Singapores land area of 733.1 km2;

February 2022, Singapore announced its intention to raise the carbon tax progressively to around S$50 to S$80 (~US$36.90 to US$59.00) per tCO2e by 2030. Singapore is also implementing concrete measures within the various sectors: a. For example, for the transport sector, Singapore is taking steps to make public and shared transport, and active mobility the preferred mode of travel; phase out internal combustion engine vehicles by 2040 and promote the adoption of cleaner and greener vehicles such as electric vehicles; and enhance the environmental friendliness of its transport infrastructure.

b. For the buildings sector, Singapore has raised the minimum energy performance standards for new buildings and existing buildings undergoing retrofitting, and enhanced funding for the Green Buildings Innovation Cluster programme, which supports the research, development and demonstration of energy-efficient technologies.

c. For industry, Singapore has enhanced its grant schemes to help individual companies reduce their emissions. The Singapore Economic Development Board (EDB) has also released the Sustainable Jurong Island report which details the Governments plans to transform Jurong Island into a Sustainable Energy and Chemicals Park;

As a small, low-lying island state, Singapore needs to pursue a comprehensive adaptation programme to protect its coasts, low-lying areas and communities (for details of Singapores adaptation vulnerabilities and strategies, see Singapores first Adaptation Communications, which is submitted as a component of its 5th National Communication, Chapter 4 on Vulnerability and Adaptation Measures). These adaptation actions will impose significant costs for the Singapore Government and k) Singapore is working actively to foster effective international cooperation on climate action, and to support other developing countries in their efforts to build capacity for climate efforts. Singapore has played an active role to support the multilateral framework of cooperation on climate change under the UNFCCC, including co-facilitating the negotiations at COP-26 that finalised the Paris Agreement Article 6 rulebook. Singapore also collaborates actively with international partners, such as the UNFCCC, the UN Development Programme (UNDP), the UN Environment Programme (UNEP), ASEAN, and city-networks such as the C40, on sharing of best practices and experiences on climate change and green growth issues. To date, close to 150,000 officials from fellow developing countries have participated in capacity-building programmes conducted under the Singapore Cooperation Programme (SCP) in key areas such as sustainable development, urban planning, water, and transport management. Singapore launched a dedicated Climate Action Package under the SCP in 2018, to offer capacity- building support in areas such as climate change adaptation and mitigation strategies, flood management, disaster risk reduction, and green finance. The CAP runs until March 2023 and will be succeeded by a three-year Sustainability Action Package (SAP). The SAP will give greater focus to the global sustainability agenda and support capacity-building in areas including strategies to build resilience for water resources and food security, managing and financing green projects, developing sustainable infrastructure, and managing carbon markets. Singapore will continue to deepen and broaden its technical cooperation programmes with other developing countries.

Even though Singapore accounts for only 0.1% of global emissions and has limited options reduce emissions to around 60 MtCO2e after peaking earlier. This represents Singapores its resources for future generations.

Agreement;

Singapores second update of its first NDC builds on the enhancements in the first update in 2020. It has been updated with a more ambitious goal to reduce emissions to around 60 ambitious target given Singapores national circumstances.

Agreement;

Singapores NDC is an economy-wide absolute GHG emissions limitation target, which Paris Agreement.

Agreement.

Singapores NDC is an economy-wide absolute GHG emissions limitation target. set out in its Article 2:

Singapores target to reduce emissions to around 60 MtCO2e in 2030 after peaking emissions earlier is an important milestone, in line with the objectives of the Paris outlined in Charting Singapores Low-Carbon and Climate Resilient Future (published in its Article 2;

2020 and updated in 2022). The combination of Singapores 2030 NDC and 2050 net zero target will contribute towards achieving the objective set out in Article 2 of the Convention.

Given its unique national circumstances and particular set of challenges, Singapores NDC is challenging and ambitious, and aims to support the collective effort to reach global Paris Agreement.

. . . . .

ACCOMPANYING INFORMATION ON SINGAPORES ADAPTATION EFFORTS measures that will entail significant costs for the Singapore Government and people but will support global climate action.

Adaptation Measures, pursuant to the Paris Agreement, and prepared taking into account Decision 9/CMA.1.

. . . . .

