South Africa updated first NDC September 2021.pdf SOUTH AFRICA FIRST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 1 (a) Mandate and scope By this communication, South Africa updates and enhances its nationally determined contribution (NDC) under the Paris Agreement, meeting its obligation under Article 4.9 to communicate NDCs every five years, and responding to the requests in paragraphs 23 to 25 of decision 1/CP.21. South Africas intended nationally determined contribution (INDC) (RSA 2015) was submitted on 25 September 2015 prior to COP 21, and became our first NDC (RSA 2016) on 1 November 2016, following our ratification of the Paris Agreement. The INDC and first NDC are identical. For simplicity we refer to the first NDC in the following, and update means both updating and enhancing the first NDC1. This document is not our second NDC  this will be communicated in 2025. The structure of the update is consistent with the first NDC, including components on adaptation, mitigation as well as support requirements for both. We continue to assume that implementation and ambition will be enabled by finance and technology and capacity building support, as stated in the first NDC, and stipulated in the Paris Agreement. This update of the first NDC is consistent with the principles and provisions of the Paris Agreement and the UNFCCC. South Africa is not listed in Annex I of the UNFCCC, and is a developing country in terms of the Paris Agreement, and updates this NDC [i]n pursuit of the objective of the Convention, and being guided by its principles, including the principle of equity and common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, in the light of different national circumstances (Paris Agreement, preamble). South Africa emphasises the importance of the provision of multilateral support in the implementation of this updated NDC as provided for in the Paris Agreement, to meet both both our adaptation and mitigation goals.

South Africas second (next) NDC will be communicated in 2025 as specified in UNFCCC decision 1/CP.21.

We have heeded the Call to Action issued by the COP 23 and COP 24 Presidencies following the Talanoa Dialogue, a facilitative dialogue in 2018 to take stock of the collective efforts towards the long-term global goal for mitigation (Article 4.1) and to inform updating of NDCs (Article 4.8) under the Paris Agreement. South Africa has considered all the principles and provisions of the Paris Agreement in updating its first NDC. We affirm that successful implementation of the Paris Agreement requires implementation by the international community of measures to achieve all the long-term goals of the Paris Agreement, on temperature, capacity, mitigation, adaptation and finance. South Africa takes the view that ambition should not only apply to setting goals, but also to their implementation.

1 Updating means updating the information in our NDC, to account for developments during the last five years since it was submitted;

1 (c) Progression and highest possible ambition, in the light of equity and national circumstances It is in this context that the update of our first NDC must be understood. The update represents a progression within our first NDC, and reflects our highest possible level of ambition, based on science and equity, in light of our national circumstances. As communicated in section 4 (c) the updated mitigation targets demonstrate considerable progression. South Africa shifted from BAU-based targets for 2020 and 2025 in terms of the Cancun Agreement under the UNFCCC, to a fixed level target range under the Paris Agreement. This update demonstrates further progression, reducing the upper range of South Africas 2025 and 2030 targets. These near- to medium-term targets are further informed by a long-term perspective contained in South Africas recently-communicated Low Emissions Development Strategy (LEDS)2 to the UNFCCC, and sets the country on a pathway to implement this Strategy.

South Africas updated NDC also contains our first adaptation communication in terms of Article 7 of the Paris Agreement in section 3, which serves as South Africas adaptation NDC. The adaptation communication provides detailed information on South Africas planned contribution to the global adaptation goal during the NDC period, anticipated climate impacts, a description of our recently- approved National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy, and details of planned adaptation actions over the next decades and their associated costs for key areas of the economy that are likely to be most impacted by climate change (health, agriculture and forestry, human settlements, biodiversity, and water). The section also contains information on the extent of risk and vulnerability, recognition of how South Africas has responded to efforts towards addressing the impacts of climate change thus far, as South Africas contribution to the global adaptation goal. The section further outlines the adaptation priorities for South Africa, ranging from policy, planning, enhancing governance and implementation of adaptation programmes.

2. Context: national priorities and circumstances South Africas NDC will be implemented in a context in which significant development challenges need to be addressed. Low economic growth over the last decade has been accompanied by high levels of unemployment and persistent poverty and inequality. The recent advent of the COVID-19 crisis has exacerbated these challenges  in common with other countries, South Africas economy is expected to contract significantly before beginning to recover from 2021 onwards. At the same time, this has created an opportunity to, in the words of South Africas President Ramaphosa, ..not merely return to where we were before the pandemic struck. We are instead looking at actions that will build a new, inclusive economy that creates employment and fosters sustainable growth (President Ramaphosa in a letter to the nation on climate change, 24 August 2020).

The revisions and enhancements in South Africas NDC are a reflection of several trends in the country with respect to climate change. First, more information is available on climate change impacts and the costs of addressing these, which is reflected in South Africas first adaptation communication, included here as the adaptation component of the updated NDC. Climate impacts have become a reality over the last decade rather than purely a risk to be prepared for. Second, lower than expected GHG emissions have been estimated over the last decade, which are partly a result of lower economic growth, but also a result of a drop in GHG intensity in the economy. The latter suggests the start of the process of relative decoupling economic growth from GHG emissions, which is as a result of increased energy efficiency, investment in renewable energy and a shift in economic growth to less energy- intensive sectors. South Africa aims to capitalise on the national and global shift to the green economy, through green industrialisation and by creating new opportunities for South Africas rich mineral endowment, many of which are vital for low emission and climate resilient development.

Since 2015, South Africa has made significant progress in implementing its response to climate change. The mitigation system continues to be further developed. Our national energy efficiency strategy has been updated for post-2015, and will be reviewed every five years. Procurement of renewable energy since 2015 has seen rapidly falling prices for wind and solar photovoltaics. On legislation, in 2016 GHGs were formally declared priority air pollutants under the existing National Environmental Management Act. This was followed in 2017 by the gazetting of GHG reporting regulations, together with the requirement that large emitters submit annual pollution prevention plans detailing plans to cut GHG emissions, and progress made in doing so. Company-level carbon budgets were introduced for large emitters on a voluntary basis in a first phase, as indicated in the first NDC. Our Green Transport Strategy was adopted in 2018, including policies to promote bus rapid transit, road to rail and electric vehicles. South Africa convened a Job Summit in 2018, which agreed to establish a Presidential Climate Commission to oversee South Africas just transition. The Commission has been approved by Cabinet and is in the process of being established through the Climate Change Bill. More details on the implementation of climate change policy in South Africa and its impacts can be found in South Africas Fourth Biennial Update Report to the UNFCCC.

The Climate Change Bill, which has been considered by both houses of Parliament from 2018, is planned to be finalised in 2021, and as framework legislation, will provide a firm legal basis for further action, including mandatory second and subsequent phases of the carbon budget programme, as well as the establishment of sectoral emissions targets (SETs). In 2019, South Africa passed a Carbon Tax Act, and started pricing GHG emissions in all sectors other than waste and AFOLU. South Africas 2014 national mitigation potential analysis is in the process of being updated, and is now maintained within government. Planning for the decarbonization of the electricity sector advanced with the gazetting of an updated Integrated Resource Plan in 2019, considering climate change mitigation amongst multiple objectives, and allocating large shares of the future energy mix to renewable energy technologies. Further details on sectoral policies and measures are reported in South Africas Fourth Biennial Update Report, summarised in its Table ES-3. By implementing these domestic measures, South Africa is showing that implementation is part of our ambition.

The long-term decarbonization of the South African economy will in the 2020s focus primarily on the electricity sector; in the 2030s, a deeper transition will take place in the electricity sector, coupled with a transition in the transport sector towards low emission vehicles; while the 2040s and beyond will be characterized by the decarbonization of the hard-to-mitigate sectors. The key challenge during the implementation periods of this first NDC (2021 to 2025, and 2026 to 2030) will be the transition in the electricity sector, seeking early investment in and preparing for mitigation in harder-to-mitigate sectors, and addressing the economic and social consequences resulting from this transition in coal- producing areas. South Africas electricity is currently mostly provided by a number of large coal plants located in the Mpumalanga province, where most of the countrys coal resources are to be found.

Implementing the NDC will require the implementation of South Africas Integrated Resource Plan (most recently finalised in 2019), which contemplates a massive investment in renewable energy over the next decade. This will also result in a number of co-benefits, such as reduced air pollution in the key pollution hot spots of the country, with health co-benefits; lower water use in a water-scarce country; and rapidly adding additional electricity generation capacity to the South African electricity system, which is currently capacity constrained.

A just transition means leaving no-one behind. It requires procedural equity to lead to equitable outcomes. A just transition is at the core of implementing climate action in South Africa, as detailed in both the mitigation and adaptation goals presented below. As South Africa indicated at the UN Secretary Generals Climate Action Summit in 2019, as part of ensuring a just transition we will need to put measures in place that plan for workforce reskilling and job absorption, social protection and livelihood creation, incentivising new green sectors of our economy, diversifying coal dependent regional economies, and developing labour and social plans as and when ageing coal-fired power plants and associated coal production infrastructure are decommissioned. Similar measures will be necessary to adapt to the impacts of climate change. Our National Planning Commission undertook extensive consultations over two years to develop a draft 2050 vision and pathways for a just transition to a low carbon, climate resilient economy and society. Based on this process, we will be finalising our Just Transition Plan, including defining pathways compatible with pursuing efforts to limit temperature increase to 1.5 C. The just transition will also need international cooperation, and requires solidary and concrete support. Ensuring that no one is left behind as we move from a high GHG emission, low- employment energy development pathway to a low emission, climate-resilient and job-rich pathway, is central to our national work on development and climate change.

3. South Africas first Adaptation Communication, serving as the Adaptation component of the NDC South Africa submits its first adaptation communication as a component of its Nationally Determined Contribution (A-NDC) in line with the Paris Agreement in Article 7, paragraph 11. Furthermore, this update to the South African A-NDC outlines goals that are aligned to Elements A-D as contained in the Annex to decision 9/CMA.1. As a developing country, the A-NDC further presents information in respect of adaptation efforts for recognition as provided for in Element E (ii) of decision 9/CMA.1. In following the guidelines of decision 9/CMA.1 on further guidance in relation to adaptation communications, South Africa emphasizes the relevance of information contained in this A-NDC as an input to the global stocktake outlined in paragraphs 23(b) and 36(c) of decision 19/CMA.1.

The NCCAS is aligned with the countrys policy and legislation, building on principles contained therein, including international agreements South Africa is party to. Relevant domestic legislation and policy include the National Climate Change Response Policy (NCCRP) (DEA 2011a), National Development Plan (NDP) (NPC 2011), National Strategy for Sustainable Development (NSSD) (DEA 2011b), sector adaptation strategies/plans, as well as provincial and municipal adaptation strategies/plans. The NCCAS is grounded in the South African Constitution, particularly Section 24, of the Bill of Rights which includes, the right to a safe and healthy environment. The draft Climate Change Bill provides a legislative basis for the implementation of the NCCAS, as such will foster institutional coherence and enhance climate change adaptation governance across the spheres, national and sub-national layers of government in South Africa.

3 (a) The extent of climate change associated risk and vulnerability The global average temperature reached 1.2oC above pre-industrial levels in 20203. South Africa is already experiencing significant impacts of climate change, particularly as a result of increased temperatures and rainfall variability, and is warming at more than twice the global rate of temperature increase (Wolski 2019)(Engelbrecht, Adegoke, Bopape, Naidoo, Garland, Thatcher, Mcgregor, et al. 2015) This increase is more pronounced for the western parts and the northeast of the country. There is evidence that extreme weather events in South Africa are increasing, with heatwave conditions found to be more frequent, dry spell durations lengthening slightly, and rainfall intensity increasing.

In the near future, average rainfall accumulation is expected to remain within historical ranges over most of South Africa, except for a decline over the Western Cape and some increases over the far eastern parts of Kwa-Zulu Natal. The country is projected to experience increased severity and frequency of drought in the central interior area. The water sector is likely to be impacted specifically in the south-western Cape and West Coast making lower priority water users (e.g. irrigation) more vulnerable. While groundwater supplies are generally more robust, warmer temperatures and lower river levels during drought are likely to lead to deteriorating water quality. The frequency of heavy precipitation events is also projected to increase in most of the country with increased chances of flooding risk.

A plausible increase in extremely hot days (a hazard indicating an increase in days where health will be at risk from exposure to high temperature) is projected in the north, north-east and north-east interior of the country. For human health, modifying factors such as age, nutritional status, access to services and underlying health conditions are known to exacerbate the impacts of climate, and these call for adaptation actions in the sector. The projected changes in temperature extremes put additional strain on the health system, including the increasing burden of disease, and affect aspects such as infrastructure, services, availability of medicines and medical supplies and emergency services. Vulnerability and risk assessment for the health sector positions subgroups such as the elderly and children as the most vulnerable to temperature extremes. It especially recognizes rural livelihoods and outdoor labour, including women, as the most exposed to extreme temperature hazards leading to adverse effects such as heat stroke.

Africans and have cost the economy in excess of R113 billion (US$6.81 billion) in economic losses. It is anticipated that a growing number of South African cities and towns will be exposed to the impacts of weather-induced hazards such as flooding, heatwaves, droughts, wildfires, and storms. This is partly due to the projected increase in the frequency and intensity of weather-related hazards, but also due to the high socioeconomic vulnerability inherent within communities, as well as poor land-use practices, growing informality, and a failure to rapidly deploy resilient infrastructure associated with accommodating a growing urbanising population. It is undeniably the poor and vulnerable communities that will experience the most severe setbacks from the impacts of climate change, eroding their livelihoods, and thus threatening their resilience.

Agriculture, forestry and fisheries sectors are critical in attracting foreign exchange, job creation and production of raw material for the economy. Across South Africa, the increase in temperatures and changing rainfall patterns will bring about distinct risks for different crops and commodities in different growing areas. The most important impacts in the near future will be on crops, tree species and livestock produced in marginal growing areas where growing conditions are already close to temperature and water availability thresholds. More significant changes are expected in average maximum and minimum temperatures, as well as the frequency of extremes such as heatwaves. This will have major implications for crops, tree species, livestock, game and fisheries as well as the prevalence of pests and diseases.

The current projections show a considerable increase in temperature and more erratic rainfall leading to biodiversity loss within the biodiversity sector, which contributes about 418 000 jobs (NBA, 2018). The risk to biodiversity is expected to increase in future, as explained by various projected climatic variables in the form of increased fire frequency and severity, erratic rainfall and increased evaporative demand on account of elevated temperatures. These are compounded by land use and exchange patterns. Limpopo, Western Cape, Mpumalanga, Free State and KwaZulu Natal provinces experienced the highest biodiversity loss. The highest risk of biodiversity loss has been evident both currently and in future in these provinces. Fynbos and the Indian coastal belt experienced high biodiversity losses relative to their sizes. About 3 and 4.5 per cent of habitat was lost between 1990 and 2018 in the fynbos and the Indian coastal belt biomes respectively, whilst a higher risk of biodiversity loss is projected in the Savanna and Grasslands. Some of this biodiversity loss is occurring in the vicinity of protected areas.

3 (b) Update to the first A-NDC The NCCAS, having been developed post the conclusion of the 2015 Paris Agreement and its Work Programme adopted in 2018, is aligned with the Paris Agreements Article 7 and the associated aspects of the Paris Rulebook. The Strategy further outlines nine strategic objectives to which sectoral responses need to be aligned. The NCCAS, therefore, is the key domestic policy instrument to guide implementation, and informs this update to South Africas first A-NDC (RSA 2016). The goals submitted herein (see Table 1 below) are largely informed by the strategic objectives of the NCCAS.and are consistent with elements of decision 9/CMA.1. The columns in Table 1 provide information as follows:

Adaptation investment  total national estimated investments required to adapt to climate change and repair damages induced by climate change and associated extreme events.

Goal 1:

Forestry and Fisheries 4 is the focal point for clim change adaptation planning.

DEFF. In 2019, there had been a m erger of the Departm ponents of the Departm ent of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. Various docum ents are referenced to DEA, DEFF and DFFE, referring to the sam e national Departm ent.

Goal 2:

y.

Risk Reduction.

Scenarios;

5. Rollout of specific tools such as the CSIR G Goal 3:

S adaptation interventions for the period 2021 to 2030 building the capacity of the local sphere of governm adaptation goals.

FCS).

S identifies interventions that are used as the basis for m goals. The interventions address both highly vulnerable areas.

s.

South A frica.

SD 267 billion.

37 5 billion by 2030.

Goal 5:

The adaptation efforts have been quantified using the core sub-program plem entation of adaptation interventions.

This includes expenditure on national and provincial program responses. In particular:

2.9 billion.

Equity in adaptation, therefore, requires a strong m ultilateral response in the context of the U ork of relevant constituted bodies under the U N ent.

4. Mitigation component of the NDC In addition to the narrative account below, more specific details on South Africas updated mitigation targets for 2025 and 2030 are provided in Table 3 below, in accordance with the guidance specified in Annex I of decision 4/CMA.1.

4 (a) Approach to setting updated NDC target ranges The mitigation component of this update of South Africas first NDC is our contribution to the long- term goal for mitigation, as stated in Article 4.1:

In order to achieve the long-term temperature goal set out in Article 2, Parties aim to reach global peaking of greenhouse gas emissions as soon as possible, recognizing that peaking will take longer for developing country Parties, and to undertake rapid reductions thereafter in accordance with best available science, so as to achieve a balance between anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks of greenhouse gases in the second half of this century, on the basis of equity, and in the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty.

Parties agreed in Paris that this goal is to inform the preparation of NDCs (decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 20). As noted above, South Africas mitigation NDC target is also informed by the Talanoa Dialogue and the IPCC special report on 1.5C.

South Africa has updated its NDC target ranges taking into account our status as a developing county, our national circumstances and common but differentiated responsibility and respective capability, and the long-term temperature goal, as specified in the Paris Agreements Article 2, in the light of the latest science. South Africa considers these updated mitigation goals as our highest possible ambition in the light of our national circumstances, and as South Africas fair contribution to the long-term mitigation goal. Targets have been set on the assumption that support will be provided to South Africa as a developing country as set out in the Paris Agreements Articles 9, 10, 11 and 13 for implementation of the targets, for the required just transition policies and measures, and for both developing capacity to report on implementation and achievement of the targets.

4 (b) Methodological consistency in setting and accounting for NDC targets Coverage, scope and the methodological basis for estimating and projecting emissions to inform South Africas NDC targets are based on the national GHG inventory. Our initial NDC communicated in 2015 referred to South Africas GHG inventory in terms of scope and coverage, and indicated the use of IPCC methodologies, as well as reflecting some uncertainties. The NDC target range was methodologically based on the latest national inventory report at the time (covering emissions for the years 2000-2010), submitted to the UNFCCC as part of SAs first Biennial Update Report (2014). The mitigation component of the NDC has been updated consistent with our latest GHG inventory in terms of coverage, scope and methodological approaches. South Africa communicated its latest National Inventory Report (NIR) (reporting emissions for the year 2000-2017) as part of its Fourth Biennial Update Report, with one notable exception, noted below in respect of the land sector.

As with the first NDC, coverage and scope of the mitigation targets in this updated NDC are on the same basis as the most recent National Inventory Report (as above). Coverage of the NDC is thus economy-wide, including the land sector (see note below), and includes the five gases currently covered by the NIR (CO2, CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs). The current NIR uses Global Warming Potential (GWP) values from the IPCCs 2nd Assessment Report, which have been used for setting the updated NDC targets. In accounting for NDC targets, South Africa will use an inventory-based approach for all sectors, which is described in more detail in the information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding (contained in Table 3 below).

The NDC targets will be accounted for on the basis of national GHG inventories for the relevant years (2025 and 2030) compiled and submitted to the UNFCCC under the Paris Agreement with South Africas Biennial Transparency Reports, in accordance with Article 13 of the Paris Agreement and decision 18/CMA.1, and any subsequent relevant CMA decisions. Target levels have been set considering that these will be accounted for using GWP values as specified in the Annex to decision 18/CMA.1, from the IPCCs 5th Assessment Report. Use of updated GWP values in place of the current values is expected to increase South Africas total emissions estimate in the target years by 10-20 Mt CO2-eq.

For accounting against our NDC target, land sector emissions arising from natural disturbances will be excluded from total land sector emissions/sinks (IPCC 2006 guidelines categories 3B and 3D). This is expected to reduce South Africas total emissions estimate in the target years by 5-30 Mt CO2-eq, depending on the occurrence of wildfires during these years. South Africa intends to take this approach to accounting for land sector emissions/sinks to take into account significant interannual variations in emissions from natural disturbances  in the case of South Africa, stemming mainly from wildfires. Emissions from this source vary considerably and unpredictably from year to year, and this variability is likely to grow with further climate change. The overall target will therefore be accounted for by comparing the target value with the GHG emissions total without the land sector (excluding categories 3B and 3D), plus the values for these categories excluding emissions from natural disturbances, which will be reported separately for each corresponding land sector category, in the NIRs accompanying South Africas Biennial Transparency Reports.

4 (c) Mitigation targets for 2025 and 2030 South Africas first NDC placed mitigation targets in the context of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, and takes the form of a peak, plateau and decline GHG emissions trajectory range. South Africas emissions by 2025 and 2030 will be in a range between 398 and 614 Mt CO2 eq, as defined in national policy, containing mitigation targets for two years (2025 and 2030), corresponding to two periods of implementation (2021-2025, and 2026-2030). This update contains targets for the same two years, corresponding to the same periods of implementation.

South Africas updated mitigation targets are contained in Table 2 below, with further information contained in Table 3, which contains the information to facilitate transparency, clarity and understanding as specified in Annex I to decision 4/CMA.1 :

Table 2 - South Africa's updated NDC mitigation targets Year Target Corresponding period of implementation 2025 South Africas annual GHG emissions will be in a range from 398-510 Mt CO2-eq.

2030 South Africas annual GHG emissions will be in a range from 350-420 Mt CO2-eq.

Note: GHG emissions are defined as total net GHG emissions as specified in the national inventory report for 2025, including all sectors, and excluding emissions from natural disturbances in the land sector.

4 (d) Information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding of mitigation In communicating this update of our first NDC, South Africa is voluntarily providing information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding (ICTU) as specified in Annex I of decision 4/CMA.1, responding to the strong encouragement to apply ICTU guidance when updating NDCs by 2020, pursuant to paragraph 7 of the decision (UNFCCC 2018a). South Africa will account for its NDC in accordance with Annex II of the same decision, from time of submission of its first Biennial Transparency Report in terms of decision 18/CMA.1.

The table presenting ICTU below enhances the information provided when communicating the INDC in 2015. We note that ICTU as agreed shall be provided for the second and subsequent NDCs, and look forward to all Parties doing so. South Africa submitted its Third Biennial Update Report in 2019, will be submitting its Fourth Biennial Update Report in 2021, and will continue submitting Biennial Update Reports until transitioning to Biennial Transparency Reports (under the Paris Agreement, in terms of decision 18/CMA.1) in 2024. In the first Biennial Transparency Report, we will specify indicators consistent with the modalities, procedures and guidelines (MPGs) for reporting on the implementation and achievement of our NDC (UNFCCC 2018b) and account for the NDC, including in reporting tables once those are agreed in on-going negotiations. South Africa will continue to pursue domestic mitigation measures to achieve its NDCs (see also section 2 above). This update to South Africas first NDC is consistent with provisions of the Paris Agreement and associated decisions.

ICTU has been provided in Table 3 below. Each row in the table corresponds to a provision / sub- provision of Annex 1 to decision 4/CMA.1. Not applicable has been entered against sub-provisions which do not apply to the South African NDC, with an explanation provided as to why these do not apply.

Table 3 - Inform ation to facilitate clarity, transparency and understand of South Africas updated NDC Provisions and sub-provisions of Annex I to decision 4/CM A.1 Inform ation provided in respect of the updated South African NDC ation on the reference point (including, as appropriate, a base year): itigation targets in relation to a reference point, but as a fixed level GHG em issions range in 2025 and 2030. Therefore, each entry below is m arked Not applicable.

(a) reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s) Not applicable, as above.

Not applicable, as above.

(c) For strategies, plans and actions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreem Not applicable, as above.

(d) Target relative to the reference indicator, expressed num erically, for ount of reduction; Not applicable, as above.

(e) Inform ation on sources of data used in quantifying the reference point(s); Not applicable, as above.

Not applicable, as above.

The South African NDC is defined as having tw o tim 2025 and 2026-2030). This update m aintains the sam plem entation:

1 January 2026 to 31 Decem ber 2030.

Provisions and sub-provisions of Annex I to decision 4/CM A.1 Inform ation provided in respect of the updated South African NDC 3. Scope and coverage:

(a) General description of the target South Africas NDC updated m itigation targets for 2025 and 2030 are specified in section 4 (c) above. Details are replicated here for transparency, clarity and understanding.

2 -eq. Note that GHG em issions are defined as total net GHG em issions as specified in the national inventory report for 2030, including all sectors, and excluding em natural disturbances in the land sector.

These targets for 2025 and 2030 correspond to tw o five-year tim ber 2030.

(b) Sectors, gases, categories and pools covered by the nationally determ South Africas first NDC covers sectors, gases, categories and pools consistent w ith our national inventory report (NIR) subm itted together w ith SAs Fourth Biennial Update Report, excluding em issions from natural disturbances in the land sector.

Sectors covered:

G ases: all gases covered in the NIR as above, w 2 O, HFCs and PFCs. The South African NDC does not include SF 6 or NF plem entation periods due to lack of data. If data becom entation period, or for the next NDC.

The land sector is included in the NDC, excluding em issions from natural disturbances. The NIR takes a land-based approach.

Provisions and sub-provisions of Annex I to decision 4/CM A.1 Inform ation provided in respect of the updated South African NDC Pools: All carbon pools are included in the NDC and NIR, w ith the exception of dead ood is not currently included, as stated in the NIR.

(c) How the Party has taken into consideration paragraph 31(c) and (d) of decision 1/CP.21; South Africas approach is inventory-based, hence all categories of anthropogenic em issions or rem ovals included in the national inventory report (NIR) are included in issions arising from natural disturbances in the land sector. Table H in the NIR transparently reports the Activities in the 2017 inventory w ated is lack of data, and detailed explanations are provided in the NIR.

South Africa has used the sam e approach for its previous NAM As under the UNFCCC for 2020 and 2025.

Not applicable to South Africas NDC, w hich is not defined in term benefits of adaptation actions and/or econom ic diversification plans.

4. Planning processes:

(a) Inform ation on the planning processes that the Party undertook to prepare its nationally determ ined contribution and, if available, on the entation plans, including, as appropriate:

Institutional arrangem ents and planning process for the N ent (DFFE) is the focal point for clim ate change in ith broader stakeholders, provincial public stakeholder w and Cabinet.

Public consultation and participation: DFFE conducted stakeholder consultations by w ay of a hybrid m odel (due to challenges brought about by the COVID pandem m anner.

Provisions and sub-provisions of Annex I to decision 4/CM A.1 Inform ation provided in respect of the updated South African NDC consultations w ere launched at the National Clim business, labour and civil society, including w om en and youth constituencies.

(ii) Contextual m atters, including, inter alia, as appropriate:

a. National circum stances, such as geography, clim sustainable developm ent and poverty eradication; b. Best practices and experience related to the preparation of the nationally determ ined contribution;

c. Other contextual aspirations and priorities acknow ledged w ent;

See section 2 above.

Not applicable. South Africa has not reached any agreem ent to im jointly w ith any other country.

(c) How the Partys preparation of its nationally determ ed by the outcom es of the global stocktake, in accordance w ith Article 4, paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreem ent;

Since South Africas NDC and the current update w ere com e of the Talanoa Dialogue and the IPCCs Special Report on 1.5 degrees. This inform ed the update of our first NDC, and consideration of fair share and levels of am bition.

Not applicable.

Not applicable.

Provisions and sub-provisions of Annex I to decision 4/CM A.1 Inform ation provided in respect of the updated South African NDC (ii) Specific projects, m easures and activities to be im contribute to m itigation co-benefits, including inform ited to, key sectors, such as energy, resources, w ater resources, coastal resources, hum an settlem ents and urban planning, agriculture and forestry; and econom anufacturing and industry, energy and m ining, transport and unication, construction, tourism , real estate, agriculture and fisheries.

Not applicable.

A;

South Africa w ill use a GHG inventory-based approach in accounting for its m ill apply the m odalities, procedures and guidelines contained in the Annex to specified in the Annex to decision 18/CM A.1 (or subsequent CM em issions for it national inventory report.

South Africa intends to perform corresponding adjustm ents in accounting for its NDC targets in accordance w ith relevant decisions taken by the CM A in relation to Article 6 Provisions and sub-provisions of Annex I to decision 4/CM A.1 Inform ation provided in respect of the updated South African NDC currently being negotiated under the Paris Agreem ent.

The target range for 2026-2030 m ay be updated w unicates its second NDC in 2025, in accordance w ith relevant decisions and provisions of the Paris Agreem circum stances, and to the latest science, the 2023 global stocktake, and the availability entation.

South Africa w ill account for its first NDC in accordance w ith the guidance contained in Annex II to decision 4/CM A.1.

Not applicable to South Africas NDC. South Africas NDC target is expressed in GHG em s of policy goals.

Inform ation on accounting is contained in 5(a) above.

M etrics: South Africa currently uses 100-year Global W th Assessm ent Report for future reports under the Paris Agreem onw ards), as specified in the Annex to decision 18/CM A decisions.

(e) Sector-, category- or activity-specific assum ptions, m ith IPCC guidance, as appropriate, including, as applicable: (i) Approach to addressing em issions and subsequent rem natural disturbances on m anaged lands:

In South Africas NIR, South Africas entire land area is considered m anaged for (3C1) section of the national inventory report at present. Em ildfires are estim ated and included in each relevant land Provisions and sub-provisions of Annex I to decision 4/CM A.1 Inform ation provided in respect of the updated South African NDC category. For the purposes of accounting for South Africas NDC target, em issions from ill be excluded from the total.

(ii) Approach used to account for em issions and rem harvested w ood products;

South Africa uses a production approach, follow ing the updated guidance provided in the 2013 IPCC Kyoto Protocol Supplem ent (IPCC, 2014).

(iii) Approach used to address the effects of age-class structure in forests; Not applicable  South Africa does not use this approach.

(i) How the reference indicators, baseline(s) and/or reference level(s), including, w here applicable, sector-, category- or activity- specific reference levels, are constructed, including, for exam ple, sources and m odels used;

Not applicable  South Africa does not have a reference indicator.

Not applicable  South Africa does not include non-GHG com ponents in its NDC m itigation target.

(iv) Further technical inform ation, as necessary;

Not applicable.

(g) The intention to use voluntary cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreem ent, if applicable. Any international transfers of m ill be accounted for as specified in decisions of the CM A.

Provisions and sub-provisions of Annex I to decision 4/CM A.1 Inform ation provided in respect of the updated South African NDC 6. How the Party considers that its nationally determ bitious in the light of its national circum stances: (a) How the Party considers that its nationally determ bitious in the light of its national circum stances; The updated NDC has outlined how SA considers its contribution to be fair and section on equitable access to sustainable developm ent, below to fairness, science, am bition, progression and other elem should be considered holistically. Here, inform ation to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding of fairness and am bition is provided.

South Africa is strongly of the view that equity should be a prim considering countries fair shares of rem aining global em issions space.

Analysis of relative fair shares for South Africa in relation to m itigation w the process of updating the NDC (UCT 2021a). The analysis review ed relevant literature o publicly available tools. First, the independent C r (CERC) w as used, on account of its transparency, ease of access ent w ith the equity principles South Africa values and prioritises  taking into account responsibility and capability, as w ell as the right to ent and the need to prioritise developm ent for those ented and validated by referring, secondly, to the aggregation of m ultiple current and historic effort-sharing studies that have been com regarding CATs m ethodology.

A range of GHG em issions levels for 2025 and 2030 w guide to South Africas fair share of global em issions, based on long-term probability below 2 C) and 1.5 C, i.e. the long-term lim its contained in Article 2.1(a) of the Paris Agreem ent. It should be noted that these relative fair shares for South Africa im ply corresponding fair shares for other countries.

Provisions and sub-provisions of Annex I to decision 4/CM A.1 Inform ation provided in respect of the updated South African NDC 2030 (adjusted to include land use). 6 South Africas w hole updated target range for 2030 (as contained in Table 2) lie w ithin the 2 C fair share range based on the post- Septem ber 2020 version of CAT (UCT 2021a). The low er end of South Africas 2030 target range lies w ithin CERCs 1.5 degree assessm ent (UCT 2021a). South Africa bears a disproportionate burden of adaptation to the adverse im pacts of clim ate change (CSIR 2020). It is an injustice that w issions, our econom y has been disproportionately negative pacts. Nevertheless, w e have invested in adaptation, and thus m ade a fair contribution to the global effort (see section 3). South Africa expects that the global stock-take w ill take into account the adequacy and effectiveness of adaptation and the support provided for adaptation.

South Africa expect that adequate international support w ill be provided for both atter of fairness, as provided for in the Paris Agreem ent.

(b) Fairness considerations, including reflecting on equity; As above, in 6(a).

(c) How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 3, of the Paris Agreem ent;

South Africas updated m itigation targets as contained in Table 2 represent a significant progression. The upper end of the target range in 2025 has been reduced by 17% , and the upper end of the target range in 2030 has been reduced by 32% , and the low t CO2-eq in 2030.

(d) How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreem ent;

South Africa has updated its m itigation targets, w reduction or lim itation targets for 2025 and 2030.

) w ith existing values and sensitivity analysis, can be found in (U CT 2021a).

Provisions and sub-provisions of Annex I to decision 4/CM A.1 Inform ation provided in respect of the updated South African NDC s .

(e) How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreem ent.

Not applicable, since South Africa is neither a least developed country, nor a sm all island developing state.

In the context of COVID-19, w e highlight the im portance of global solidarity, in fighting the virus and clim itting ourselves to the m ulti-lateral rules based e highlight the im portance of ensuring that food production is not ent to proceed in a sustainable m anner.

Article 2, paragraph 1(a), and Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Paris Agreem ent.

This update of our first NDC is South Africas contribution to the global tem perature ell below 2 C and pursuing efforts to 1.5 C below pre- industrial levels. Both of these agreed global tem bition, as explained above.

Clearly, Article 2.1 (a) of the Paris Agreem ent contains tw perature increase to 1.5 C. There is a single aim , to lim Provisions and sub-provisions of Annex I to decision 4/CM A.1 Inform ation provided in respect of the updated South African NDC perature lim its.

Since then, the IPCCs Special Report on 1.5C has m ade clear the sm global carbon budget, even sm aller than for 2C. W e note that the special report assessed the com industrial levels, but did not assess the agreed global tem perature lim th Assessm ent Report. The recently-released IPCC 6th Assessm Group I Report found that that global tem perature in the last decade is already 1.09 [0.95 to 1.20] C higher than preindustrial levels, due to 2390  240 Gt CO 2 em e note that there is still no internationally-agreed equity reference fram ith takes into account historical em issions and responsibility for the future. W ithin the context of the Paris Agreem on but differentiated responsibility, in the light of different national circum update the first NDC to reflect our highest possible am bition.

2050, considering goals of net zero or zero em issions for South Africa. In our long-term unicated voluntarily under Article 4.19, South Africa com ill require various interventions to reduce greenhouse gas em ill be achieved to ensure a just transition, and how the m unicated in future iterations of this strategy. Consistent w Article 4.1 on equity, and the context of sustainable developm ent and efforts to eradicate poverty, our national process aim s at a just transition. W ission to oversee the just transition. It is by leaving no-one behind that South Africa collectively w ill contribute to achieving the goals of the Paris Agreem ent.

5. Support requirements under the Convention and Paris Agreement Effective multilateral co-operation was identified by the IPCCs Special Report on 1.5C as a key factor in achieving the temperature goals of the Paris Agreement. South Africas NDC is premised on continued effective multilateral cooperation in the context of the UNFCCC and its Paris Agreement, and the provision of support, both for implementation by developing countries, and for the UNFCCC Secretariat and constituted bodies under the UNFCCC and its Paris Agreement, by developed countries and others in a position to do so. The role which the constituted bodies and other bodies under the UNFCCC and its Paris Agreement, supported by the UNFCCC Secretariat, play in providing support to the implementation of climate policy in developing countries will be critical if developing countries are to implement their NDCs effectively over the next decade. These include the Adaptation Committee, the Adaptation Fund Board, the Executive Committee for the Warsaw Mechanism for Loss and Damage, the Consultative Group of Experts, the Katowice Committee of Experts on the Impacts of the Implementation of Response Measures, the Least Developed Countries Expert Group, the Facilitative Working Group of the Local Communities and Indigenous Peoples Platform, the Standing Committee on Finance, the Technology Executive Committee, the Paris Committee on Capacity-Building and bodies of the Financial Mechanism, including the Global Environment Facility and the Green Climate Fund.

The Paris Agreement specifies that support be provided to developing countries in relation to mitigation (Article 4.5, ..recognizing that enhanced support for developing country Parties will allow for higher ambition in their actions), the conservation and enhancement of sinks (Article 5.1), adaptation (Article 7.13), loss and damage (Article 8.3) and transparency (Articles 13.14 and 13.15), through the provision of finance (Article 9), technology development and transfer (Article 10) and capacity-building (Article 11). The basis for South Africas NDC is the assumption that support will be provided for the implementation of the targets and goals specified above, for mitigation, adaptation and loss and damage. South Africa expects developed countries to continue to provide and mobilize climate finance and to support country-driven strategies, consistent with Article 9. South Africa will require support for a just transition towards net zero CO2. We also expect developed countries to show progression beyond previous efforts, to set a new collective quantified goal from a floor of USD 100 billion per year, taking into account the needs and priorities of developing countries.

The overall costs of implementing South Africas climate policies associated with the achievement of this NDCs targets and goals are partially estimated above and below. A detailed description of current policy implementation-related needs is provided in South Africas Biennial Update Reports under the Convention and in the forthcoming Biennial Transparency Reports under the Paris Agreement.

The just transition in South Africa will require international cooperation and support. In the first NDC, South Africa identified various technologies that could help us to further reduce emissions. In addition to these, we update to indicate the need for support in the form of concessional finance for low carbon projects; debt restructuring; support by the international climate and development and finance community for non-fossil-fuel development in Mpumalanga and elsewhere, and infrastructure to support energy efficiency, transmission and green hydrogen in support of electric vehicles, and public transport. South Africa will seek to develop small, medium and micro-enterprises, including energy service companies, to implement innovative technologies and create sustainable employment. In addition to implementation of emissions reductions in the 2020s pursuant to the updated NDC target ranges contained in Table 2 above, support will also be required for longer term decarbonization, which will require investments in the 2020s in infrastructure, technology development and capacity-building.

The projected costs of adaptation over the 2021-2030 period are detailed in the adaptation communication above, and include the costs of adaptation measures themselves, as well as the costs of building the relevant human and institutional capacity. In addition, South Africa will face significantly higher costs as a result of climate impacts which cannot be avoided during this period, and further work is underway to accurately quantify the costs.

Support required for implementation includes the building of institutional and human capacity. Capacity-building is a continuous activity and initially focusing on the period of implementation  in our case, 2021-2025 and 2026-2030. A long-term perspective is important, to continue to build capacity for deep and rapid decarbonisation, and for adaptation to the impacts climate change. Long and deep transformations, for example in producing green steel, require international cooperation and support. In such transformations, we will seek to raise further awareness of the financial and technical support available for promoting the strengthening of gender integration into climate policies, including good practices to facilitate access to climate finance for grassroots women's organizations and indigenous peoples and local communities. Support for implementation of transparency and building of transparency-related capacity should be provided on a continuous basis, pursuant to Article 13.14 and 13.15 of the Paris Agreement.

As detailed in South Africas 4th BUR, during the years 2018-2019, South Africa received USD4.886 billion in climate finance, or around USD2.4 billion per year, the majority of which was in the form of loans (11.% of this total was received in the form of grant finance, and the remainder in the form of loans). The overwhelming majority of this support was provided for mitigation projects.

South Africas key goal for its updated first NDC is to access significantly higher levels of climate finance during the periods of implementation of the first NDC, with a view to achieving a floor of USD 8 billion per year by 2030. This is in line with Article 4.3 of the Convention and Article 9.1 of the Paris Agreement. These resources will be equally distributed balanced between adaptation and mitigation, in line with Article 9.4 of the Paris Agreement. Additional finance will be mobilized on this basis, including Article 9.3 of the Paris Agreement as well as other forms of support from bilateral and multilateral sources as required.

An assessment of equity also needs to take into account means of implementation. Generally, South Africa needs time for sustainable development, which is necessary to eliminate poverty, reduce inequality, increase employment and promote inclusive economic growth, while simultaneously seeking to contribute to mitigation and assist our vulnerable communities in adapting to climate impacts. South Africa has developed policies in key sectors on mitigation and adaptation focused on both reaching climate goals and ensuring a just transition in which no-one is left behind. It is assumed that international support will be available as specified in Articles 9, 10 and 11 of the Paris Agreement to ensure that both development and climate goals can be met within the timeframe of this NDC, for mitigation, adaptation and loss and damage.

Regarding mitigation, South Africa has undertaken further detailed analysis of its relative fair share, updating the information provided in the first NDC. A fair share framework was developed, as a lens on how South Africas mitigation contribution represents a fair share of global mitigation efforts (see Table 3, section 6a above; and UCT 2021a).

The Paris Agreement in its Article 2 and 7.1 provides for increasing the ability to adapt to the adverse impact of climate change in line with the goals towards limiting global average temperature increases; the agreement further in Article 7.2 recognizes the global nature of the adaptation responsibility. In this respect, Africa and South Africa, are warming at a rate that is above twice the global average temperature increase (Wolski 2019). The driver of this trend is the collective effect of global emissions, as such South Africa and the African continent bear a disproportionate share of the adaptation burden, both because of the uneven global distribution of climate impacts, and because of the skewed historical responsibility for GHG emissions.

Fairness and adequacy of the South African NDC should therefore be looked at holistically, where the contributions by the country are not only looked at from an emissions reduction perspective but also an adaptation perspective.

7. Uncertainties With COVID-19, there has been a reduction in GHG emissions globally, but there is very high uncertainty on how long it may take the economy to recover, and for emissions to potentially rise again. While these factors have been taken into account as far as possible, this has added additional uncertainties to emissions projections for the 2020s. Another key implication relates to support. While the socio-economic consequences of COVID-19 are highly uncertain, it is very likely that South Africa will be more highly indebted than prior to the crisis, which will add additional strain to the South African fiscus, constrain local capital markets and potentially increase the cost of borrowing. While the South African greenhouse gas inventory system has consistently improved in its coverage and in the detail and quality of estimation of greenhouse gases, considerable uncertainties remain in estimating GHGs, especially in the land sector. As South Africa improves its systems for estimating land sector emissions, recalculations may result in significant changes in previously reported GHG estimates.

In addition, more accurate land sector reporting will lead to higher variability in GHG emissions from natural disturbances from wildfires, which will also become more common in South Africa as a result of climate change. The extent to which adaptation measures will need to be implemented will depend on what is achieved globally in terms of mitigation.

8. References and further information CSIR. 2021. Nationally Determined Contributions Update: Adaptation Component. Pretoria.

DEA. 2011a. National Climate Change Response White Paper. Pretoria: Department of Environmental Affairs, South Africa.

. 2011b. National Strategy for Sustainable Development and Action Plan. Tshwane: DEA.

DEFF. 2020a. National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy. Tshwane.

. 2020b. National Climate Risk & Vulnerability (CRV) Assessment Framework. Tshwane.

Engelbrecht, Francois, Jimmy Adegoke, Mary-Jane Bopape, Mogesh Naidoo, Rebecca Garland, Marcus Thatcher, John Mcgregor, et al. 2015. Environmental Research Letters Projections of Rapidly Rising Surface Temperatures over Africa under Low Mitigation Related Content Projections of Rapidly Rising Surface Temperatures over Africa under Low Mitigation. Environ. Res. Lett.

IPP office. 2020. Independent Power Producers Procurement Programme (IPPPP): An Overview, as at 31 March 2020. Centurion.

NPC. 2011. National Development Plan 2030: Our Future - Make It Work. Pretoria: National Planning Commission, The Presidency, South Africa.

. 2016. South Africas Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC). 1 November. Tshwane.

UCT. 2021a. South Africas Fair Share: Mitigation Targets in the Updated First NDC in an International Context. Cape Town.

UNFCCC. 2018a. Decision 4/CMA.1: Further Guidance in Relation to the Mitigation Section of Decision 1/CP.21. Document FCCC/PA/CMA/2018/3/Add.1. Katowice.

. 2018b. Decision 18/CMA.1, with Annex: Modalities, Procedures and Guidelines for the Transparency Framework for Action and Support Referred to in Article 13 of the Paris Agreement. Document FCCC/PA/CMA/2018/3/Add.2 . Katowice.

Wolski, Piotr. 2019. Twice the Global Rate. CSAG Blog. University of Cape Town.

