Switzerland is pleased to update its information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding of its updated and enhanced nationally determined contribution (NDC) under the Paris Agreement cov- ering the years 2021 to 2030, in accordance with Article 4 of the Paris Agreement and UNFCCC deci- sions 1/CP.21 and 4/CMA.1.

According to Decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 24 and 25, Parties have the obligation to submit to the secretariat their nationally determined contributions at least 9 to 12 months in advance of the relevant session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement with a view to facilitating the clarity, transparency and understanding of these contributions, and Parties whose intended nationally determined contribution contains a time frame up to 2030 are requested to communicate or update by 2020 these contributions and to do so every five years thereafter. Switzerland had accordingly communicated and updated its NDC on 19 February 2020 and announced that it will submit the information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding once the deliberations on the revision of the third CO2 Act are concluded in Parliament. It also announced that it will follow the guidance adopted at COP-24 in December 2018 in Katowice. Accordingly, after conclusion of the par- liamentary deliberations of the revision of the third CO2 Act, Switzerland had submitted, on 9 December 2020, the information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding of its updated NDC of 19 February 2020, highlighting that the revised CO2 Act is subject to a popular referendum. On 13 June 2021, the revision of the third CO2 Act was rejected in the referendum by the Swiss population. This referendum did not question the NDC of Switzerland to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by at least 50 percent by 2030 compared with 1990 levels, neither its carbon neutrality target by 2050. Rather, it called into question specific measures of the revised CO2 Act to reach these objectives. On 17 Decem- ber 2021, the Swiss Parliament approved an extension of the CO2 reduction target and crucial mitigation measures. This amendment to the CO2 Act ensures that Switzerland will continue to reduce its emis- sions by 1.5 per cent annually until 2024 compared to 1990 levels through mitigation measures taken mainly domestically. On 17 December 2021, the Swiss Federal Council opened formal discussions of a new proposal with concrete measures for the time after 2024 in view of reaching the objective as formu- lated in Switzerlands NDC.

Switzerland herewith submits a revised version of the information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding which reflects the outcome of the referendum of June 2021 and the decisions taken since then by the Swiss Federal Council and the Swiss Parliament in December 2021.

Switzerlands updated and enhanced NDC is in line with latest findings by the IPCC1 to reduce global CO2 emissions by about 45 percent from 2010 levels by 2030 and to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 in order to limit warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius. For improved mutual understanding and comparability of the contribution, Switzerland hereby provides the information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding of its NDC by voluntarily applying the guidance in relation to the mitigation section of 1/CP.21 adopted at COP-24 in Katowice earlier than required (4/CMA.1).

The updated and enhanced NDC represents a progression in several areas:

- a progression of the NDC from minus 50 percent by 2030 to at least minus 50 percent by 2030 compared to 1990 levels;

- an increase of the indicative goal to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to net zero emissions by 2050 (compared to the previous objective of minus 70 to 85 percent by 2050 compared to 1990);

Finally, Switzerland applies the guidance adopted at COP-24 in Katowice.

Switzerlands NDC comprises a mitigation target only. Comprehensive information on adaptation strat- egies, planning, measures and implementation are found in Switzerlands first adaptation communica- tion under the Paris Agreement (2020)2 and in Switzerlands 7th National Communication (2018)3.

Switzerland is committed to follow recommendations of science in order to limit warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius. In view of its climate neutrality target by 2050, Switzerlands NDC is to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by at least 50 percent by 2030 compared with 1990 levels, corresponding to an average reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by at least 35 percent over the period 20212030. By 2025, a reduction of greenhouse gases by at least 35 percent compared with 1990 levels is anticipated. Internationally transferred mitigation outcomes (ITMOs) from cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement will partly be used. The methodological approaches underlying the Swiss NDC are included in this communication.

Long-term: Switzerland aims to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 2050. This target lays the foundations for Switzerlands 2050 climate strategy, which was transmitted to the UNFCCC Secretariat on 28 January 2021.

1. Quantifiable information on the reference point (including, as appropriate, a base year):

For non-forest land (cropland, grassland, wetlands, settlements, other land): reference period as applicable, in the target year;

Emissions in base year (1990) comprise emissions from all sectors, except LULUCF. Indirect CO2 is also included. Provisional value for base year emissions, subject to change due to recalculations of the greenhouse gas inventory, is 54158.92 kt CO2eq. The value for the final accounting will be defined in the inventory submission covering data up to 2030.

Emissions/removals from LULUCF will be reported and accounted for on a land-based ap- proach. Forest land and non-forest land are not included in base year emissions, since only the net change in emissions compared with the reference level/period is accounted for in the land use sector (see 5f below).

Not applicable.

Emission reduction of at least minus 50 percent by 2030 compared with 1990 levels corre- sponding to an average reduction of greenhouse gas emissions of at least 35 percent over the period 20212030.

Data source for the quantified information on the base year and reference period as well as for the construction of the reference level is the respective greenhouse gas inventory.

Values of the reference indicators (base year, reference period, and reference level) are sub- ject to recalculations and technical corrections, in accordance with UNFCCC decision 18/CMA.1. In addition, Switzerlands National Inventory System Supervisory Board (NISSB) adopted principles for technical corrections of reference levels including that recalculations need to be based on sound scientific evidence, reflect the best available data and shall be transparently documented. Information on updates will be provided in the Biennial Transpar- ency Reports.

2. Time frames and/or periods for implementation:

This quantified commitment by 2030 is translated into an average commitment over the period from beginning 2021 to end 2030. Information on the anticipated level of emissions for 2025 is given for international comparability.

Switzerland expresses its NDC both as single-year and multi-year target. The reduction target of at least minus 50 percent by 2030 compared with 1990 levels corresponds to an average reduction of at least minus 35 percent over the period 2021-2030.

3. Scope and coverage:

Base year for gases covered: all 1990 (not relevant where a reference level/period approach Sectors covered: energy; industrial processes and product use; agriculture; land-use, land-use change and forestry; waste and other4 (consistent with 2006 IPCC guidelines). All categories and pools in Switzerlands inventory are covered.

While Switzerland supports the inclusion of international aviation and navigation on the basis of existing and future internationally agreed rules applicable to all Parties, Switzerlands NDC currently does not include emissions from international aviation and navigation. In particular, Switzerlands domestic emission reduction targets do not include emissions from international aviation, a part of which are already covered by the Swiss emission trading scheme (ETS) as well as by the Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme CORSIA of the International Civil Aviation Organisation ICAO. However, Switzerlands domestic emissions reduction targets do include emissions from national aviation and navigation.

Switzerland has included all categories of anthropogenic emissions or removals in its NDC.

Not applicable.

4. Planning processes:

The emission reduction target of at least minus 50 percent by 2030 has been approved by the Swiss Parliament in 2016. Comprehensive consultation proceedings for both the second CO2 Act and the ratification of the Paris Agreement including the 2030 target had preceded the parliamentary debate, allowing stakeholders in Switzerland to comment on the target and the implementation plan. The ratification of the Paris Agreement passed the parliamentary process in 2017, after the deadline for a facultative referendum expired. The second CO2 Act underwent revision and parliamentary debate and the third CO2 Act was adopted by both chambers on 25 September 2020. The third CO2 Act was subject to a facultative referendum in June 2021 and was rejected by the Swiss population, following months of public debate. Parliament is cur- rently working on new legislation.

Following the Fukushima nuclear accident in 2011, the Swiss Government and Parliament decided to gradually phase out nuclear energy, i.e. new plants were banned while existing plants were allowed to continue operating as long as deemed safe. To replace the share of nuclear energy, the Energy Strategy 2050, along with implementing legislation, was adopted and eventually endorsed by a majority of Swiss voters in 2017. The Strategy foresees to in- crease annual generation from new renewable sources other than hydropower to 11,400 GWh (from 4,186 GWh in 2019) and average hydropower production to 37,400 GWh by 2035 (from 36,137 GWh in 2019). Efficiency policies aim at stabilizing electricity demand.

Long term: Switzerland plans its climate policy in 10-year-steps, continuously strengthening its reduction targets. In August 2019, and in response to the findings of the IPCC special report on 1.5 degrees Celsius, the Swiss Government communicated that Switzerland aims to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 2050. In doing so, Switzerland contributes to the internationally agreed target of limiting global warming to a maximum of 1.5 degrees Celsius when compared with the pre-industrial era. In November 2019, a popular initiative was submit- ted calling for a constitutional article to stipulate the net zero target and a ban of fossil fuels as of 2050. In August 2021, the Federal Council adopted the message for a direct counter-pro- posal to the initiative (Glacier Initiative). This pursues the same goal as the initiative: net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. However, the counter-draft refrains from a fundamental ban on fossil energy sources. The initiative and the Federal Council's message will be subject to parliamentary debate.

For further information on domestic institutional arrangements, see Switzerlands 7th National Communication (NC) 5.

Information on national circumstances can be found in Switzerlands 7th National Communica- tion (NC) and in the annex of this communication.

Switzerland recognizes the need for an effective and progressive response to the urgent threat of climate change, in line with the best available scientific knowledge. Switzerland fully sub- scribes to the view that Parties should, when taking action to address climate change, respect, promote, and consider their respective human rights obligations, including due consideration for gender equality and gender sensitive policies, intergenerational equity, and the needs of particularly vulnerable groups. Switzerland is further committed to upholding environmental integrity, including the integrity of ecosystems and the protection of biodiversity. In addition, Switzerland is aware of the importance of the removal of fossil fuel subsidies, due to their major impact on greenhouse gas emissions. At the national level, Switzerland is ac- tively reviewing its remaining fossil fuel subsidies. At the international level, Switzerland, to- gether with Costa Rica, Denmark, Ethiopia, Finland, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden and Uru- guay, is engaged in the Friends of Fossil Fuel Subsidies Reform who promote the removal of fossil fuel subsidies, in particular in G20-countries.

Not applicable.

Article 4, paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreement;

The first global stocktake takes place in 2023. As per UNFCCC decision 1/CP.24, paragraph 37, Switzerland considered the outcome of the 2018 Talanoa Dialogue, including the IPCC report on 1.5 degrees Celsius that was commissioned in this regard. In this context, Switzer- land came to the conclusion that its NDC by 2030 is in line with recommendations of the IPCC to reduce emissions by about 45% percent compared with 2010 levels by 2030, given Switzer- lands per capita emissions are below global average. On the other hand and in line with the IPCC report on 1.5 degrees Celsius, the indicative target for 2050 communicated in 2015 has been revised and raised to net zero greenhouse gas emissions.

Agreement to submit information on:

Not applicable.

Switzerlands greenhouse gas inventories form the basis for the accounting. Accounting ap- proaches underlying Switzerlands NDC and methodologies used are outlined below and are consistent with UNFCCC decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 31, and UNFCCC decision 4/CMA.1. The respective reporting is contained in this communication as well as in future Biennial Trans- parency Reports (BTRs) under the Paris Agreement, consistent with UNFCCC decisions mined contribution;

Not applicable.

Switzerland will develop a forest reference level (FRL) for managed forest lands. This refer- ence level will draw on Kyoto Protocol methodologies for developing what the Kyoto Protocol referred to as a forest management reference level (FMRL) (see UNFCCC decision 2/CMP.6). For forest land, elements like the calculation method of harvested wood products (HWP), the ate;

Good Practice Guidance Arising from the Kyoto Protocol (2013 KP Supplement) by the IPCC.

Inventory methodology used: IPCC 2006 guidelines, 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC guide- lines, or any subsequent version or refinement of the IPCC guidelines agreed upon by the CMA, as per UNFCCC decisions 4/CMA.1, paragraph 1a and 18/CMA.1, paragraph 20. 2013 Revised Supplementary Methods and Good Practice Guidance Arising from the Kyoto 2/CMP.7.

Global Warming Potential Values used: 100-yr GWP values from 5th IPCC assessment report, or from a subsequent IPCC assessment report as agreed upon by the CMA, as per UNFCCC decision 18/CMA.1 paragraph 37.

For forest land, the provision of natural disturbances will be applied. In cases or events in which emissions of natural disturbances are higher than the nationally established threshold value, it will be possible to exclude these emissions. This threshold value is based on the background level and the margin and will be calculated consistent with the 2013 KP Supplement using the same data set as used for the development of the scenario (current management practices) on which the forest reference level is based on.

For non-forest land, no provisions for natural disturbances will be applied.

Harvested wood products are accounted for using a production approach (only wood from domestic harvest), consistent with the 2013 KP Supplement.

The effects of the age-class structure in forests are addressed through the forest reference level, which is calculated following the principles of the 2013 KP Supplement.

The LULUCF sector will be accounted for based on a land-based approach.

Definitions: Forest land encompasses all forest land remaining in this category (managed for- est land) and all conversions from (deforested land) and to (afforested land) this category. For forest land, the same definition and parameters that Switzerland used under the Kyoto Protocol are applied.

Managed forest land will be accounted for by comparing emissions/removals to a forest refer- ence level (FRL). Emissions and removals resulting from afforested and deforested land will be accounted for as being the total emissions and total removals for each of the years (gross- net).

The FRL will include living and dead biomass and harvested wood products (HWP). To calcu-  Living biomass: The model Massimo calculates changes in living biomass. Massimo Kyoto Protocol Second Commitment Period.

Dead biomass (dead wood, litter, mineral soil): The model Yasso07 is applied. Yasso07 is also applied for the annual reporting in the context of the Swiss greenhouse gas inventory as well as for the calculation of dead wood of the FMRL.

HWP: The first order decay function and other methodological aspects from the 2013 KP Supplement are used, similar as for the FRML.

For a detailed description of the application, validation and verification of Massimo and Yasso07 and of the methodology used for HWP see Switzerlands NIR 20206 and the refer- ences within.

The underlying scenario to calculate the FRL is based on the extrapolation of forest manage- ment practices, also called current management practices. This scenario is statistically de- rived from data from the national forest inventory covering 1985-2006 (NFI1, NFI2, NFI3). By using these historical NFI-data, age class structure and other typical Swiss forest characteris- tics (growth conditions, mortality, harvesting practices, etc.) are reflected in the scenario. Other data sources used to establish the FRL are the same as used for the Swiss greenhouse gas inventory.

Net accountable emissions/removals from managed forests lands are anticipated to be around zero if there are no distinct changes in forest management practices, assuming there are no clearly distinguishable changes within the NDC period arising from climate change and using the application of natural disturbance provisions where they arise.

Non-forest lands will be accounted for by comparing emissions/removals to a reference period that presents a long-term historic average preceding 2020 (preferably 1990-2020). In its 2019 inventory submission, Switzerland provided modelling for soil carbon for the first time. The model is under constant improvement, and numbers will most certainly change over time. An- nual variability in the model is large and trends are not yet fully understood. A single year reference is not considered representative. Consequently, Switzerland chooses a long refer- ence period to increase robustness of the reference value.

Methodologies to estimate greenhouse gas fluxes for different land uses and land-use changes are currently subject to major developments. The final decision regarding the length of the reference period will depend on the availability of sufficient and reliable data sets required for the methodologies currently under development.

Switzerland welcomes a specific technical assessment of reference levels, when based on a projection, in the context of the technical expert review process under the Paris Agreement (Transparency Framework).

Additional technical details on the forest reference level for managed forest and the reference period of non-forest land including quantified information will be provided at a later stage, at the latest in the first Biennial Transparency Report (BTR) under the Paris Agreement due in 2024.

Not applicable.

Not applicable.

(iv) Further technical information, as necessary; Not applicable.

Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, if applicable.

Switzerland will realize its NDC mainly domestically and will partly use internationally trans- ferred mitigation outcomes (ITMOs) from cooperation under Article 6. Switzerland will imple- ment the guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Paris Agreement, adopted at COP26, and the San Jos principles for high ambition and integrity in international carbon markets7, to apply robust rules that avoid any form of double counting, ensure environmental integrity and promote sustainable development, including the protection of human rights, and not to use pre-2020 units towards the achievement of its NDC. As of December 2021, Switzerland signed bilateral agreements with Peru, Ghana, Senegal, Georgia, Vanuatu, and Dominica, creating the necessary frameworks for cooperative ap- proaches under Article 6.2 of the Paris Agreement. The agreements govern the transfers of mitigation outcomes and their use and define the method for corresponding adjustment. The ITMOs may be used for other mitigation purposes, such as e.g. voluntary climate neutrality targets by private or sub-state actors, which would not be counted towards Switzerlands emis- sions reductions objectives. Furthermore, the agreements ensure environmental integrity, pre- vents double counting, and foresees concrete requirements regarding the promotion of sus- tainable development, including the protection of human rights.

6. How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances:

It is important to Switzerland that the global community shares the required efforts to combat global climate change in a fair and equitable manner. The same rules must apply to all Parties, while the effort to reduce greenhouse gas emissions must be differentiated according to a Partys responsibility and capacity.

Switzerlands commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 50 percent by 2030 relative to 1990 levels puts Switzerland on an emission development pathway in line with the recommendations by science to keep average global temperature increase to 1.5 degrees Celsius.

Switzerlands emission reductions by 2030 will mainly be achieved domestically, thereby fur- ther strengthening Switzerlands transition to a low carbon economy. Given the low green- house gas intensity of Switzerland today, this NDC represents a high level of ambition for 2030. Switzerland pursues its emission reduction efforts, giving due consideration for fairness and equity. Fairness considerations include various aspects. No single aspect on its own can ac- curately reflect fairness. The evolving nature of a countrys circumstances should also be re- flected in fairness considerations.

Switzerlands understanding of a fair share includes in particular consideration of the aspects below.

Responsibility is reflected in a countrys past, current and future greenhouse gas emis- sions. Total emissions as well as per capita emissions are to be considered.

Today, Switzerland emits around 0.1 percent of worlds emissions and per capita emis- sions are below worlds average. Through climate policies implemented domestically, Switzerlands total share in global emissions as well as per capita emissions continue to decrease despite a substantial growth in industrial production (1990  today: +75.1 percent) and population (1990  today: +27.1 percent). Switzerland has a low level of historic emissions, contributing less than 0.2 percent of cumulative global emissions  Capacity to contribute to solving the climate problem is closely related to the ability to invest in appropriate mitigation measures, such as carbon-efficient technologies.

Hence, one aspect of capacity is to take into account GDP per capita in fairness con- siderations.

Another core aspect in considering a fair contribution of a country are cost-efficient mitigation potential and abatement costs. Abatement costs vary strongly across coun- tries. It is also to note that marginal abatement costs increase if a country has under- taken ambitious mitigation actions in the past. In fairness considerations, it is important to consider past efforts and early movers.

In Switzerland, GDP per capita is high, signifying high ability to invest. At the same time, abatement costs are also high due to the limited availability of short-term cost- efficient mitigation potential: Switzerlands energy production is nearly carbon free and there is little heavy industry. Territorial emission reduction potential mostly remains in the buildings and transport sectors. This remaining potential has long transformation periods.

Based on equity considerations outlined above, Switzerland is committed to strongly reduce greenhouse gas emissions in line with emission reduction pathways that keep the increase in global average temperature to 1.5 degrees Celsius. Switzerland stays committed to continue the fight against climate change at the forefront of international action.

In the interest of timely climate action and as an addition to domestic actions, Switzerland intends to use Article 6 activities, contributing to the overall emission reduction target of at least minus 50 percent by 2030 compared with 1990 levels.

Article 4, paragraph 3 of the Paris Agreement provides that each Partys NDC will present a progression beyond the Partys then current NDC and reflect its highest possible ambition. Switzerlands NDC reflects a progression of effort compared with its communication submitted in October 2017. Given the clean energy mix in Switzerland, mitigation opportunities remaining are at high costs. Switzerland follows an overall emission reduction target of at least minus 50 percent by 2030 compared with 1990 levels, partially using emission reductions abroad. Con- siderable efforts are needed to reach the target. In this regard, Switzerland has continuously increased the rate of the CO2 levy on heating and processes fuels, reaching a rate of 96 Swiss francs per tonne of CO2 (about 99 US dollars per tonne of CO2) since 2018. Indeed, a ratchet- ing-up mechanism automatically increases the rate of the CO2 levy on heating and process fuels if intermediate targets are not met.

In addition to domestic efforts, and given Switzerland is a high-income country, Article 6 activ- ities will be used to complement domestic actions contributing to the overall emission reduction target of at least minus 50 percent by 2030 compared with 1990 levels.

Furthermore, the enhanced NDC also reflects the decision by the Swiss Government to aim for a climate neutral Switzerland by 2050. In doing so, Switzerland strengthens its efforts in reducing greenhouse gas emissions in order to contribute to the internationally agreed objec- tive of limiting global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius when compared with the pre-industrial era.

The updated and enhanced NDC therefore represents a progression in several areas:

- a progression of the NDC from minus 50 percent by 2030 to at least minus 50 percent by 2030 compared to 1990 levels;

- an increase of the indicative goal to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to net zero emis- sions by 2050 (compared to the previous objective of minus 70 to 85 percent by 2050 compared to 1990);

Finally, Switzerland applies the guidance adopted at COP-24 in Katowice.

Article 4, paragraph 4 of the Paris Agreement provides for developed countries, such as Swit- zerland, to continue taking the lead by undertaking economy-wide emission reduction targets. Switzerland has a long history of concrete climate policy measures and a CO2 Act since 2000. The country had absolute economy-wide emission reduction targets both under the first and second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol and will continue to formulate absolute econ- omy-wide targets.

Not applicable.

7. How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2:

The Paris Agreement has been adopted in the context of the UNFCCC and specifies its provi- sions. Thus any actions and measures taken in view of Article 2.1a and 4.1 of the Paris Agree- ment serve the objective of the Convention.

Switzerlands commitment to reduce emissions by at least 50 percent by 2030 relative to 1990 levels puts Switzerland on an emission development pathway that corresponds with the latest recommendations of the IPCC special report on 1.5 degrees Celsius to reduce global CO2 emissions by about 45 percent from 2010 levels by 2030. The formulated commitment by 2030 is further consistent with the longer term aim of the Swiss Government to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 2050. In order to reach net zero emissions, technologies that permanently remove greenhouse gases from the atmosphere and store them are to be used in the future to some extent. It is to note that Switzerlands per capita emissions were already at world average levels in 2006.

Today, Switzerlands share in global greenhouse gas emissions is around 0.1 percent. In 2019, total greenhouse gas emissions of Switzerland equated 46.2 million tCO2eq. This corresponds to emissions of 5.4 tCO2eq per capita, which is below worlds average. The largest shares of greenhouse gas emissions arise from transport (1A3) and from build- ings (energy use in the commercial/institutional sector (1A4a) and in the residential sector (1A4b)). Agriculture (3) and industrial activities (energy use in the manufacturing industries and construction sector (1A2) as well as emissions from industrial processes (2)) also contribute substantial shares to Switzerlands total greenhouse gas emissions, while energy industries (1A1) are less emissions-intensive when compared with many other countries. The remaining sources (energy use in the agriculture/forestry/fishing sector (1A4c) and other (military) (1A5), as well as fugitive emissions from fuels (1B) and emissions from waste (5) and other (fire damages) (6)) as well as emissions of indirect CO2 are of lower importance (see figure 1).

Figure 1. Switzerlands greenhouse gas emissions in 2019 by sector. Total emissions correspond to 46.2 million tCO2eq.

Over the last 25 years, Switzerland has experienced substantial economic and population growth. These two parame- ters influence the consumption and production of energy, traffic volumes and the number and volumes of heated build- ings, which strongly impact greenhouse gas emissions in almost all sectors. Compared with 1990, by 2019, Switzer- lands real gross domestic product (GDP) as a measure of economic output had risen by 61 percent, the building space that had to be heated for households and services increased by 45 percent, 49 percent more passenger cars, motor cycles and coaches were in circulation on Swiss roads and 28 percent more people lived in Switzerland. Greenhouse gas emissions in this period nevertheless decreased slightly: new buildings are better insulated than in the past, cars have become more fuel efficient, heating oil is increasingly replaced by natural gas and electricity (e.g. for heat pumps) and the trend away from petrol- to diesel-powered passenger cars also contributed to a reduction in CO2 emissions.

Figures 2 and 3 show the respective reduction over the period 1990 to 2019 in greenhouse gas emissions per capita by 33 percent and in greenhouse gas emissions per real gross domestic product by 47 percent, indicating the decou- pling of economic growth from greenhouse gas emissions.

Figure 2. Relative changes in Switzerlands greenhouse gas (GHG) and CO2 emissions from 1990 to 2019 compared to the Swiss population (1990=100).

Figure 3. Relative changes in Switzerlands greenhouse gas (GHG) and CO2 emissions from 1990 to 2019 compared to the Switzerlands real gross domestic product (GDP).

Switzerland has long-standing climate policies and since 2000, a specific CO2 Act has been established. Switzerland had committed itself under the first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol and reached its target to reduce green- house gas emissions to 92 percent of base year (1990) emissions over the period 2008 to 2012, including through the use of carbon credits. At the beginning of 2013, the second CO2 Act, a revision of the first CO2 Act, entered into force in revised form, providing the framework of the Swiss climate policy under the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol. The committed target  i.e. a reduction to 84.2 percent of base year (1990) emissions over the period 2013 to 2020  required decisive action. Recently, the existing legal framework has again been subject to revision in view of Switzerlands commitment under the Paris Agreement for the period from 2021 to 2030.

Climate change has already left many marks in Switzerland. The environment, society, and the economy are affected. Since the beginning of temperature measurements in Switzerland in 1864, the average annual temperature has risen by 1.75 degrees Celsius. In the Alps, the cryosphere is hard hit: glaciers have been retreating at an accelerating pace since 1980. Since 1999 alone, glaciers have lost over 12 percent of their volume. If the warming continues, only a fraction of the current glacier cover will be left by the end of the 21st century with large impacts on the seasonal availability of water for drinking water, agriculture and power generation. Parallel to the retreat of glaciers, the perma- nently frozen subsoil (permafrost) in the high mountains also continues to thaw. More frequent mountain and rock falls as well as debris slides that can endanger transport links, infrastructure and human life in the high mountains are a result of this. Already today, large investments are necessary to secure infrastructures at higher elevations. People are not only threatened by natural disasters caused by climate change, but their health is also directly affected. Only re- cently has it also been recognized that even the slow but steady increase in daily temperatures has a demonstrable impact on the well-being of people. Daily maximum temperatures in Switzerland have risen steadily since 1960. Hotter than usual summers have already led to higher mortalities.

Switzerland remains committed to an ambitious and robust implementation of the Paris Agreement, in line with recom- mendations by science to hold average global temperature increase to a maximum of 1.5 degrees Celsius.

At COP26 in Glasgow, the Conference of Parties to the Paris Agreement requested Parties to revisit and strengthen the 2030 targets in their nationally determined contributions as necessary to align with the Paris Agreement temperature goal by the end of 2022, taking into account different national circumstances (paragraph 29, Decision 1/CMA.3). Swit- zerland hereby submit its response to this request. According to the 2018 IPCC report Global warming of 1.5C", global net anthropogenic CO2 emissions decline by about 45% from 2010 levels by 2030 in model pathways with no or limited overshoot of 1.5C, or more precisely in a range of 45-60%. The IPCC Sixth Assessment report, in its Working Group III, specifies this target for net global green- house gas emissions at 48% by 2030 [3669%] compared to 2019 emissions. According to the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report (SPM B6), global GHG emissions in 2030 associated with the imple- mentation of Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) announced prior to COP26 would make it likely that warming will exceed 1.5C during the 21st century. In addition, policies implemented by the end of 2020 are projected to result in higher global GHG emissions than those implied by NDCs, indicating an implementation gap. Today, Switzerlands share in global greenhouse gas emissions is around 0.1 percent. In 2020, total greenhouse gas emissions of Switzerland equated 43.4 million tCO2eq. This corresponds to emissions of 5.04 tCO2eq per capita, which is below worlds average. In Switzerland, the largest shares of greenhouse gas emissions arise from transport and from buildings (energy use in the commercial/institutional sector and in the residential sector). Industry and agricultural activities (energy use in the manufacturing industries and construction sector as well as emissions from industrial processes) also contribute sub- stantial shares to Switzerlands total greenhouse gas emissions, while industries in the field of energy are less emis- sions-intensive when compared with many other countries. The remaining sources (energy use in the agriculture/for- estry/fishing sector and other (military), as well as fugitive emissions from fuels and emissions from waste) as well as emissions of indirect CO2 are of lower importance. Switzerland has stabilized its emissions until 2010 compared to 1990, until 2020 the greenhouse gas emissions de- creased by 19% within the country. In line with IPCC findings, Switzerland commits to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by at least 50 per cent by 2030 compared to 1990 levels, corresponding to an average reduction of green- house gas emissions by at least 35 per cent over the period 20212030. By 2025, a reduction of greenhouse gases by at least 35 per cent compared to 1990 levels is anticipated. International carbon credits will partly be used. Switzerlands NDC is an economy-wide target. Sectors covered include energy, industrial processes and product use, agriculture, land-use, land-use change and forestry, waste and other (consistent with 2006 IPCC guidelines). All cate- gories and pools in Switzerlands inventory are covered. In Switzerland, the 2030 climate target is subject to the CO2 Act. On 13 June 2021, the revision of the third CO2 Act was rejected in the referendum by the Swiss population. This referendum did not question the NDC of Switzerland to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by at least 50 percent by 2030 compared with 1990 levels, neither its carbon neutrality target by 2050. Rather, it called into question specific measures of the revised CO2 Act to reach these objec- tives. On 17 December 2021, the Swiss Parliament approved an extension of the CO2 reduction target and crucial mitigation measures. This amendment to the CO2 Act ensures that Switzerland will continue to reduce its emissions by 1.5 per cent annually until 2024 compared to 1990 levels through mitigation measures taken mainly domestically. On 16 September 2022, the Federal Council adopted the message on the revised CO2 Act for the period from 2025 to 2030. The concrete measures proposed in the message allow Switzerland to achieve its formulated NDC. The Parlia- ment is expected to start its deliberations this autumn. In parallel, the popular initiative "For a healthy climate (Glacier Initiative)" was submitted by the Swiss Climate Protec- tion Association on November 27, 2019. The initiative provides for the insertion of a new constitutional article on climate policy (Art. 74a BV), which requires that from 2050 Switzerland should not emit more greenhouse gases than can be permanently stored in safe greenhouse gas sinks. The Swiss Parliament has come out strongly in favor of an effective indirect counter-proposal to the Glacier Initiative. This counter-proposal was supported by the Federal Council and finally approved by Parliament on 30 September 2022. The counter-proposal is subject to a facultative referendum. The Parliaments indirect counter-proposal supports the main objective of the popular initiative: to achieve climate neutrality in Switzerland by 2050. With the counter-proposal, the goal of zero net greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 must be implemented in law. By drafting a legislative amendment in the form of a framework law, it aims to anchor concrete climate objectives in Swiss law as quickly as possible and thus to advance Swiss climate policy in the long term.

Switzerland is therefore pleased to communicate new measures and policies, to be applied in Switzerland, which will help strengthen its NDC implementation. Emission reduction targets:

After 2050, the amount of CO2 extracted and stored using negative emission technologies must be greater than the remaining greenhouse gas emissions.

The reduction targets must be achieved by reducing greenhouse gas emissions in Switzerland compared to 1990 as follows:

2) in the transport sector:

3) in the industry sector:

After consultation with the concerned actors, the Federal Council may set target values for greenhouse gases and for emissions from fossil energy sources. In doing so, it will take into account the latest scientific knowledge, new technologies available and regional developments.

The reduction targets must be technically feasible and economically viable. Wherever possible, they should be achieved through domestic emission reductions.

Emissions generated by fuels that are filled up in Switzerland for international air and sea transport shall be taken into account in the above objectives.

The Confederation will initiate an extraordinary ten-year programme to replace fossil fuel-fired heating installations, electric resistance heating systems, hot water preparation systems, and measures to increase energy efficiency of buildings.

This programme is additional to the existing Buildings Programme, which aims to support emission reductions in buildings.  If the replacement of the heating system is accompanied by thermal insulation measures in buildings, the Confed- eration may provide a guarantee for these measures.

The extraordinary heating system replacement program is fully financed by the Confederation up to a maximum of fully financed by the Confederation, up to a maximum of CHF 200 million per year. The Federal Assembly will grant a 10-year commitment credit by means of a simple federal decree.

These measures will reduce dependence on imported fossil fuels.

No contribution shall be paid for measures that are already being promoted or included in an instrument to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

The Federal Assembly grants a six-year commitment credit (up to CHF 1.2 billion) by means of a simple federal decree.

The Confederation will use this six-year commitment credit to cover the risks associated with the investments in public infrastructure required to achieve the net zero objective.

The Confederation ensures that the Swiss financial center makes an effective contribution to low-emission devel- opment that is resilient to climate change. This includes measures to reduce the climate impact of national and international financial flows. The Federal Council may conclude agreements with the financial sector to make financial flows compatible with climate objectives.

After hearing all pertinent actors and taking account of the latest scientific knowledge, the Federal Council shall submit proposals to the Federal Assembly in due time for the implementation of abovementioned objectives.

The provisions of other federal and cantonal acts, in particular in the areas of CO2, the environment, energy, spatial planning, finance, agriculture, forestry and the timber industry, road and air transport and the taxation of mineral oil, must be designed and implemented in such a way that they contribute to achieving the abovementioned ob- jectives.

In the case of special situations in mountain and peripheral regions, additional support should be provided where possible.

Temporary measures to address possible energy emergencies in Switzerland In order to address a possible energy emergency in Switzerland, the Federal Council has decided on 17 August 2022, to build a gas or fuel based reserve power station, which should be ready in the second half of the Winter 2022/23. This reserve power station would be used in coordination with the hydro power stations only in emergency situations when the demand for electricity cannot be met. If operational, the reserve power station would be fully integrated into the Swiss emission trading system and would therefore have to compensate its emissions with domestic emissions reductions. This emergency power station would be used, if at all, only for a few hours or days. There is a good probability that the emergency power station will never be used. Thanks the integration into the emission trading system, this temporary measure to address possible energy emer- gencies in Switzerland will not lead to an increase of greenhouse gas emissions in Switzerland.

Conclusion An important market signal: the anchoring of intermediate targets up to 2050 is a key element in the bill. Together with the sectorial objectives, the proposal gives the Swiss economy planning and investment certainty and reduces the risk of future expensive mis-investments. The benchmarks also specify how much each sector should contribute to the net zero target. Better alignment of short-term with long-term targets: the concrete measures to achieve the net zero target will be included in future revisions of the CO2 Act. The precise objectives of the new law will therefore serve as a basis for short-term climate protection measures. These measures must be aimed at strengthening the economy and be socially acceptable. Net negative after 2050: the core of the bill is the achievement of net zero emissions in Switzerland by 2050 at the latest. However, it goes even further and requires that the emissions balance must become negative overall after 2050. This is consistent with the latest scientific findings: only if greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere fall again can global warming be limited to 1.5 degrees Celsius with a sufficiently high probability.

