Tanzania is already affected by climate change and variabilities, with extreme events such as droughts and floods causing major economic costs, reducing long-term growth, and disrupting livelihoods of both rural and urban communities. Climate change impacts are affecting agricultural production, water resources, marine and coastal zones, public health, energy supply and demand, infrastructure, biodiversity, and ecosystem services. Current climate vulnerability and future climate change impacts are significant enough to development, and poverty reduction targets. This Tanzanias nationally determined contribution (NDC) provides a set of interventions on adaptation and mitigation, which are expected to build country resilience to the impacts of climate change and contribute to the global effort of reducing greenhouse gases (GHG) emission.

This NDC is in line with Article 4 of the Paris Agreement, which establishes a 2oC above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature to 1.5oC. Also, it builds on the National Climate Change Response Strategy (2021), the Zanzibar Climate Change Strategy (2014), and other national climate change and development frameworks. The two strategies are aimed to give guidance to stakeholders in the effort to enhance adaptive capacity to climate change in order to support long-term climate resilience of social systems and ecosystems, and to enhance participation in climate change mitigation activities to contribute to international efforts while ensuring sustainable development.

An extensive consultative process involving relevant sectors and stakeholders, under the coordination of the Vice Presidents Office, Division of Environment has been crucial in developing countrys commitments presented in this NDC.

The NDC will be implemented as Tanzanias incremental contribution beyond the current efforts and upon availability of adequate and predictable financial and technological support from the international community. The United Republic of Tanzania is committed to effectively meet the objectives of the NDC and engage in national and international processes to fast-track its greenhouse gas emissions economy-wide between 30-35% relative to the Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario by 2030. I therefore, call upon all stakeholders to participate effectively in implementing the commitments in this NDC.

The preparation of this nationally determined contribution (NDC) would have not been successful without participation, cooperation, commitment and hard work of many stakeholders and experts in both public and private sectors, and we would like to acknowledge their collective efforts and dedications. We would like to thank all the relevant ministries, departments, and agencies institutions, and civil society organizations (CSOs) for their active participation throughout the process. Their proactive commitment to contribute in the collection of the baseline information, in the consultations, and in building a national consensus captures the national interest towards addressing the challenges of climate change.

On a special note, we would like to register our heartfelt thanks for the NDC Task Team for the tireless efforts in coordinating this critical exercise despite challenges such as the COVID-19 pandemic.

We wish also to thank the development partners, especially the European Union through the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), German Society for International Cooperation (GIZ), Climate Action Network (CAN), and Forum for Climate Change (ForumCC) for their financial and technical contributions that led to the finalization of this NDC document.

LULUCF Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry.

NDC Nationally Determined Contribution REDD+ Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation Figure 1: Relative contribution of sectors to national GHG emissions, historic (1990, 2010) and projected (BAU, 2030). Note: Transport is included in the energy sector. IPPU is Industrial Processes and Product Use. LULUCF is Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry. Livestock is included in the Figure 2: Projected emission reductions from BAU with low and high ambition Box 2. Estimated lower and upper GHG emission economy-wide reduction ecological, and physical environment at local, national, regional, and global levels. Global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty require concerted efforts at different levels1. Article 4.2 of the Paris Agreement sets an obligation which nationally determined contribution (NDC) that it intends to achieve.

Furthermore, Article 7.10 of the Paris Agreement underlines that Party should submit and update periodically an adaptation communication, which may include its priorities, implementation and support needs, plans, and actions, without creating any additional burden for developing country.

The United Republic of Tanzania is Party to the United Nations Framework Convention (UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement (PA), which it ratified in 1996 and 2018, respectively. Moreover, Tanzania is highly vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change and therefore needs to put in place adaptation actions in order to safeguard development gains and achieve its development targets2. Existing studies and reports reveal that extreme weather conditions such as increased seasonal variation in observed rainfall and temperature have been significant in most parts of Tanzania3. For example, frequent and prolonged droughts have led to the drying out of some water bodies, with a consequent loss of biodiversity and grazing lands and a reduction in hydropower capacity4. On the other hand, anomalies of rainfall intensity and distribution have been witnessed as record-breaking events from 2015 to2020.

Such extreme weather conditions affect national economic growth, due to a activities, particularly agriculture, tourism, fishing, and livestock keeping. For example, droughts and floods have already caused major economic costs, reducing long-term growth, and disrupting livelihoods of both rural and urban Tanzania (2011) and Zanzibar (2011) provide indicative costs for enhancing adaptive capacity and long-term resilience in Tanzania. According to these reports, an initial cost estimate of addressing current climate change risks is about USD 500 million per year5. This cost is projected to increase rapidly in the future, with an estimate of up to USD 1 billion per year by 20305. The net economic costs of addressing climate change impacts is estimated to be equivalent to 1 to 2% of GDP per year by 20305. Similarly, Tanzania would require an investment of approximately USD 160 billion for mitigation activities aimed at achieving 100% renewable energy for electricity, buildings, and industry by 2050.

In sum, climate change adverse impacts in Tanzania affect almost all economic sectors in the country, including agricultural production, water resources, marine and coastal zones, public health, human settlement, land use planning, energy supply and demand, infrastructure, biodiversity and ecosystem services. Current climate variability and future climate change impacts are projected to be significant enough to curtail Tanzania from reduction targets.

Despite Tanzanias very low GHG emissions, the country is committed to embark on a sustainable development pathway and undertake mitigation measures based on national circumstances and capabilities. Tanzania has been undertaking various efforts towards addressing climate change in accordance with its national context. The National Climate Change Response comprehensively elaborate adaptation measures and mitigation actions that strategies aim to enhance adaptive capacity to climate change and promote adaptation action in order to support long-term climate resilience of social systems and ecosystems, and to enhance participation in climate change mitigation activities to contribute to international efforts while ensuring sustainable development. These two strategies were instrumental in the formulation of this Tanzania NDC. In addition, other national development programmes, strategies, plans and initiatives informed identification of adaptation and mitigation priorities outlined in this NDC.

Moreover, Tanzania is facing several challenges related to weak institutional, financial; poor access to appropriate technologies; weak climate knowledge management, inadequate participation of key stakeholders, and low public awareness have significantly affected effective implementation of various strategies, programmes, and plans.

Therefore, the updated NDC is expected to address such challenges through successful implementation of identified adaptation and mitigation contributions.

Contribution (INDC) that was submitted in 2015 by the United Republic of Tanzania to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change national policies, goals, vision, programme, plans and initiatives. The NDC is Development Vision (2050), and the Third Five Year Development Plan (FYDP III). The NDC is also anchored in the National Climate Change Response Strategy (2021) and the Zanzibar Climate Change Strategy (2014). It also reflects and embraces other national development initiatives and frameworks such as blue economy, industrialization, implementation of countys strategic projects and plans including Standard Gauge Railway network, Julius Nyerere hydropower project, and construction and improvement of transport systems and networks across the country. Moreover, this NDC is aligned with the Paris particular SDG 13, and other closely related SDGs such as SDGs 1, 7, 12, 14, 15, 16 and 17, the New Urban Agenda (2016), agenda 2063 on the Future Africa We Want and Sendai Framework on Disaster Risk Reduction (2015).

The priority sectors for both adaptation and mitigation were identified through a review of national policies, legislations, strategies, programmes, action plans, informative reports, UNFCCC decisions, global goals and other initiatives and concepts that foster development and take into account gender equality and good governance as well as nature-based solutions.

This NDC was developed in a consultative and inclusive manner with series of workshops being undertaken in the Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar. These workshops brought together representatives from the ministries, departments, and agencies (MDAs); local government authorities (LGAs); development partners (DPs); civil society organizations (CSOs); academic and research institutions; and the private sector. Several technical sessions were held to finalize the NDC before the submission of the document for approval.

Tanzania achieved a low middle-income status in July, 2020 and is still characterised with low emissions and high vulnerability to the impacts of climate change that are common in most least development countries (LDCs) as well as other developing countries. The per capita emissions of the United Republic of Tanzania were estimated at 0.22 tCO2e in 2014 6 , which is significantly below global average of 7.58 tCO2e7 recorded in the same year. However, given the disproportional effect of climate change, adaptation to the adverse impacts continues to be a topmost priority in the implementation of the NDC.

Nevertheless, cognizant of the unequal global share of carbon space, mitigation efforts to be undertaken will adhere to article 3 of the PA The Parties should protect the climate system for the benefit of present and future 6 National Climate Change Strategy, Vice Presidents Office, United Republic of Tanzania. 7 Emissions Database for Global Atmospheric Research (EDGAR), Joint Research Centre (JRC).

In view of this, Tanzania has put forward its mitigation targets that are likely to contributing to reduction of the greenhouse gases. Considering the national circumstances, Tanzanias national contribution is considered fair and ambitious for achieving the long-term goals of the Paris Agreement.

The implementation of this NDC is guided by the principles of the UNFCCC, particularly the principle of equity and that of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities. Furthermore, the implementation will be guided by the Paris Agreement Work Programme adopted at the 24th Session of the Conference of the Parties (COP24) focusing on the following actions:

Tanzania will embark on a climate resilient development pathway. In doing so, it will reduce the impacts of climate change variability and associated extremes such as droughts and floods, which have long-term implications to all productive sectors and ecosystems, particularly the agricultural sector. The adaptation measures are expected to significantly reduce the risks of climate related disasters compared to the current situation. Access to clean and safe water for total population in urban and rural areas will be increased conservative and a worst-case scenario of 50cm and 1m sea-level rise by 2100, the contribution will verifiably reduce the impacts of sea level rise to the island and coastal communities, infrastructure and ecosystems including mangroves. To achieve these targets, the government will consider the impacts of climate change in development planning at all levels and will pursue adaptation measures as outlined in this NDC.

The adaptation contributions in this NDC have been informed by the emission trend, present and future sectoral vulnerabilities, and impacts of COVID-19, which has tragically exposed unprecedented level of unpreparedness. Box 1 summarizes countrys climate change adaptation targets by 2030.

Changes in key climate variables have already been observed in Tanzania. According to the Second National Communication (URT, 2015), trend analysis results for the period 1961  2013 show a significantly increasing trend in mean annual maximum and minimum temperature with temperature rises of above 1C in average maximum temperature. The increase in mean annual minimum temperature was found to occur much faster than for mean annual maximum temperature. Marked drying areas have been observed in parts of devastating effects to agriculture, water resources and energy production and demand. Currently, a significant proportion (about 70%) of all types of natural disasters in Tanzania are climate change related and are linked to recurrent droughts and floods8.

The most recent projections for climate change in Tanzania (Future Climate for Africa, 2017)9 show a strong agreement on continued future warming in the range of 0.8C to 1.8C by the 2040s, evenly distributed across Tanzania. The warming trend leads to a corresponding increase in the number of days above 30C by 20-50 days in the central and eastern parts and up to 80 additional days in the coastal area of Tanzania. Warming until 2090 is projected in the range of 1.6C to 5.0C depending on the level of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.

Rainfall in Tanzania is increasingly variable. Projections indicate that rainfall will decrease during dry seasons and increase during wet seasons which translates to higher risks for drought and flooding. In addition, the southern half of Tanzania is expected to experience a slight decrease in average annual rainfall by 2030, whilst the north western region around Lake Vitoria is projected to observe a slightly higher amount of annual average rainfall. By 2090 these changes can reach up to 10% of current annual rainfall averages (Future Climate for Africa, 2017)12.

As a result of these projected climate changes, the frequency and severity of extreme weather events are expected to increase and with it the impacts on climate-sensitive sectors, in particular agriculture and water resources, as well as impacts on infrastructure and ecosystems. Together with major socio- economic trends, such as population growth and urbanization, climate change will negatively affect the ability to achieve Tanzanias development goals. Adaptation is therefore vital for reducing the impacts from climate change and for realizing a climate resilient development pathway. Adaptation interventions will further be elaborated in the National Adaptation Plan (NAP).

The following adaptation measures will therefore be pursued by the United Republic of Tanzania in various sectors:

Agriculture a) Upscaling the level of improvement of agricultural land and water resourcesmanagement. b) Increasing productivity in an environmentally sustainable way through, inter alia, climate-smart agriculture interventions.

Livestock a) Promoting local and modern climate resilience knowledge for sustainable pasture and rangeland management systems and practices. b) Enhancing climate resilience livestock infrastructures and services.

Energy a) Promoting climate resilient energy systems.

Coastal, Marine Environment and Fisheries a) Strengthening management of coastal and marine resources and monitoring systems.

Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene a) Promoting climate-smart integrated water resources management.

Land Use and Human Settlements Development a) Promoting resilient land use planning and management.

Health a) Promoting climate-resilient public health system.

10 FYDPII includes the expected result of Climate change impacts on key infrastructure and settlements addressed by 2020 (p. 170).

Disaster Risk Reduction a) Promoting integrated disaster risk management.

Gender Mainstreaming a) Enhancing gender equity in climate change adaptation actions.

Capacity Building a) Building internal capacity for climate modeling in terms of training and acquisition of technology.

Technology Development and Transfer a) Promoting acquisition and installation of appropriate technology for across sectors for climate-resilient production.

Tanzania will reduce greenhouse gas emissions economy-wide between 30 - 35% relative to the Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario by 2030, whereby about 138 - 153 Million tons of Carbon dioxide equivalent (MtCO2e)-gross emissions is expected to be reduced, depending on the baseline efficiency improvements, consistent with its sustainable development agenda. The emissions reduction is subject to review after the First Biennial Update Report (BUR) and Updated GHG inventory in the country.

The United Republic of Tanzania puts forward four priority sectors for climate change mitigation in this NDC due to their significant potential in greenhouse gas emissions reduction. Box 2 below summarizes estimated lower and upper targets of GHG reduction from business as usual (BAU).

Box 2. Estimated lower and upper GHG emission economy-wide reduction targets by 2030 For the global effort to avoid dangerous anthropogenic climate change, a below 2C scenario requires serious mitigation actions including a substantial deviation from baseline emissions by 2050 in all developing countries. Tanzania continues to undertake various efforts, which contribute to the global mitigation agenda.

Priority mitigation sectors are energy, transport, forestry, and waste emissions in Tanzania currently, and are expected to continue to increase, as shown in Figure 1. Reducing emissions in these sectors will enable the country to embark on a low emission growth pathway, while achieving the desired sustainable development.

Tanzania is aiming for a greater use of natural gas and harnessing renewable energy sources. There are an estimated 57 trillion cubic feet of discovered reserves of which to-date over 100 million cubic feet have been exploited to produce 527 MW10. Whilst natural gas is a fossil fuel, and therefore contributes to increasing climate change, it results in half the CO2 emissions as charcoal11, which is a current large fuel source. Carbon-free options include: expanding the use of renewable energy sources such as geothermal (with a potential of 650 MW); solar, with average sunshine of more than 9 hours per day; hydro, with a potential of 4.7 GW (while the installed capacity is 562 MW); and wind with speed of 0.9  9.9 m/s across many parts of the country12.

Figure 1: Relative contribution of sectors to national GHG emissions, historic (1990, 2010) and projected (BAU, 2030). Note: Transport is included in the energy sector. IPPU is Industrial Processes and Product Use. LULUCF is Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry. Livestock is included in the Agriculture sector. (Source: Tanzania GHGs Inventory In the transport sector, Tanzania is expanding its rail and road networks that promote the use of public transport. In addition, the rapid transport and mass marine transport systems are being improved, this will significantly contribute to emission reduction. Tanzania is aiming at reducing emissions from 11 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. 12 African Development Bank Group, Renewable Energy in Africa: Tanzania Country Profile (2015).

Element Information Type Emissions reduction as a percentage reduction from a energy, transport, forestry, and waste management sectors.

The NDC includes the following GHG:  Carbon dioxide (2)  Methane (4)  Nitrous oxide (N2O) Reference year 2000 Timeframe By 2030 Estimated quantified impact on GHG emissions Low ambition scenario, 30% reduction, would result in approximately 138 Million tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (MtCO2e) reduction from the BAU scenario by 2030. High ambition scenario, 35% reduction, would result in approximately 153 Million tones of carbon dioxide equivalent (MtCO2e) reduction from the BAU scenario by 2030.

Intention to use market- and non- market-based mechanisms to meet contribution There is huge potential for market and non-market- based mechanisms that can contribute to significant reduction in Greenhouse gases emissions. The projects can be developed and implemented as Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs), Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) and Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) especially in the areas of renewable energy and energy efficiency, forestry, transport and waste management.

Tanzania used the IPCC 2006 Guidelines, the 100- year Global Warming Potentials (GWPs) and considering country circumstances.

Figure 2: Projected emission reductions from BAU with low and high ambition scenarios by The uncertainty range of the BAU projection is also shown, representing the uncertainty of economic and political factors, reaching 5% uncertainty in 2030.

Third National Communication (TNC) and First Biennial Update Report (BUR) under preparation will provide more recent estimates of GHG emission that will be used in the subsequent NDC submissions.

The United Republic of Tanzania has prioritized four mitigation sectors in this NDC. These sectors are energy, transport, forestry, and waste. Whether the low or high ambition scenario is realized ultimately depends on the level of international support.

Energy a) Exploring options for improved clean power interconnection with neighbouring countries.

Transport a) Promoting low emission transport systems through deployment of mass expansion/scaling up of BRT infrastructures.

2030.

Forestry a) Enhancing and upscaling implementation of participatory forest management programmes.

Waste Management a) Promoting environmentally sound waste management practices that support reuse, reduce and recycle.

A national MRV (Measurement, Reporting and Verification) system is essential in implementation of NDC, in particular mitigation efforts. A national MRV implementation of NDC in a transparent manner.

In order to achieve the NDC targets, Tanzania has committed to strong leadership by putting in place five components to ensure effective governance and institutional arrangement; presence of technical team of experts; data management; effective co-ordination, systems and tools; and participatory approaches involving public. These components are discussed below. national laws relevant for ensuring effective delivery of stipulated commitments, as well as institutional arrangement that mandate organisations to engage with financial, technological, and capacity building suppliers to enable the actions to be implemented. To track progress of implementation, the government has put in place a GHG inventory and MRV system that will be updated regularly to allowing assessment of the impact of mitigation actions.

Tracking the progress of implementation of the adaptation actions across sectors, a regular vulnerability assessment will be conducted to allow assessment of the impact of adaptation. This will be linked with the existing national monitoring and evaluation frameworks including the guidelines for monitoring and evaluation framework for climate change adaptation (2012). For the GHG inventory system, emission estimates will be compiled at the national level and then disaggregated to the Tanzania Mainland and Zanzibar.

The institutional arrangement for implementation of the NDC (Figure 3) is in alignment with the National Climate Change Response Strategy (2021) and the Zanzibar Climate Change Strategy (2014), and links closely to the GHG inventory and MRV system. The arrangement provides for transparency in data supply, processing, approval, and reporting. The institutional arrangement comprises of the following key institutions:

Zanzibar Climate Change Steering Committee (ZCCSC) are responsible for guiding the coordination and implementation of the NDC and providing sectoralparticipation.

Authority (NDA) office after receiving and perusal of the information from National Carbon Monitoring Centre (NCMC).

Authorities (LGAs).

Agriculture (SUA) is responsible for overall planning, coordination, and management of MRV system, which include adaptation information. Each of the sectoral ministries in collaboration with respective local government authority will prepare sector specific initiatives. Each initiative should consist details on specific actions to be undertaken and how they will be achieved; time frame for implementing the initiative; the GHG emission reduction to be achieved; means to tracking progress; source of funding; and where appropriate the development of Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMA), the National Adaptation Plan (NAP) and Clean Development international climate finance.

Technical experts For effective delivery of intended output, each sector ministry will identify a technical team of experts capable of gathering and processing the required data as well as tracking and quantifying the mitigation and adaptation actions and associated financial flows. The team will have a suitable back-up expertise and appropriate training.

For an effective implementation and tracking of progress of the mitigation and adaptation actions, sector ministries in collaboration with local government authorities will play a role in the collection of high-quality information and data as well as reporting. For efficient and effective data flow, specific aspects of considered.

There will be an effective system, for managing the production and archiving of data and analysis for GHG inventories, mitigation and adaptation actions and financial flows, which will include tools and co-ordination systems that range expertise, resources, and available circumstances in order to support the process.

This NDC implementation plan depends largely on climate finance mechanism under UNFCCC, bilateral and multilateral Climate Financing sources. To ensure that there are sustainable financial arrangements, in collaboration with the ministries of finance and planning, both VPO and FVPO (Zanzibar) will work closely with relevant sectoral ministries, LGAs, private sectors, civil societies, faith-based organisations, and other stakeholders in resource mobilization for the implementation of key actions stipulated in the NDC.

Possible sources of funding are explained below.

Under multilateral funding (Figure 4), the operationalization of the Financial Mechanism is entrusted to several international entities, like the Global Environment Facility (GEF), which are for instance hosting the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) and the Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF). The Adaptation Fund is linked to Article 11 of the Convention as well. Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) typically provide funding through their own lending programs and funding channels.

Figure 4 provides an overview of the multilateral funds and programs that have been established under the UNFCCC, as part of the foreseen financial assistance from Parties with more resources to those less endowed and more vulnerable (Articles 11 of the Convention), as well lists some of the main dedicated multilateral climate funds and programs that are being managed by the major Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs).

Bilateral funds and programmes Besides their conventional (climate) development aid funding, some key bilateral donor funders have established dedicated climate initiatives to support the development and implementation of climate change mitigation and adaptation activities internationally. These dedicated bilateral programs and funds are also less concerned about incremental costs or additionality of climate change interventions. They mostly apply specific, dedicated climate- change/environmental project selection and general investment criteria. These include co-funding and expertise, and management and financial capabilities of implementing organizations. Figure 4 provide details of main bilateral climate funds and programmes.

Figure 4: Overview of climate change financing. (Source: Tanzania GHGs Inventory Report Private investors This includes portfolio investors, corporations and private banks that make investments primarily in the form of either debt or equity. Life insurance among potential sources of domestic and foreign private-sector climate finance.

Moreover, effective implementation of the identified mitigation and adaptation components to the United Republic of Tanzanias GHG reduction and climate resilient development efforts will require timely access to adequate and predictable financial resources, access to appropriate technologies, availability of appropriate knowledge and skills, institutional linkages, and capacity building.

The NDC Implementation Plan provides costed prioritized actions per sector to guide stakeholders in supporting the implementation of this NDC in Tanzania Mainland and Zanzibar.

The implementation of the NDC is based on the countrys various policies, development programmes, strategies, and action plans, which are set to be reviewed regularly. Therefore, the NDC will be reviewed in a participatory manner and in accordance with the Article 4 of the Paris Agreement to reflect the emerging needs, changes, and ambition level.

