Figure 4: Historical C Stocks before Hurricane Maria (2017) and Projected C Stocks recovery from 2018 to 2030 (tC) 49 Table 3: Institutional, Regulatory and Systematic Frameworks in support of the NDC Implementation Plan 17 Table 6: Total aggregate GHG mitigation progress in relation to the 2020 target in relation to the updated baseline estimate and excluding the LULUCF sector 34 Table 11: Transport sector targets identified for implementation of the Low-Carbon Transport Dominica Project 56 Table 12: Summary of Climate Change Mitigation Activities contingent on financial support 61 Table 13: Information necessary to facilitate Clarity, Transparency and Understanding of Dominicas NDC 61 Table 14: Summary of Climate Change Adaptation Activities contingent on financial support 82 Table 15: Multi-Sectoral Targets and Initiatives to achieve Climate Resilience 93 Table 16: Summary of Climate Change Resilience Initiatives, Lead Institutions and Financial Support Required 98 The revision of the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) for the Commonwealth of Dominica was led by the Ministry of Environment, Rural Modernization and Kalinago Upliftment, in close collaboration with the Climate Resilience Executing Agency for Dominica.

The Commonwealth of Dominica expresses its sincere gratitude to the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the support received for the development of this updated NDC through its Climate Promise Initiative.

The Commonwealth of Dominica, as a signatory to the Paris Agreement, remains committed to global efforts for climate action and ambition to achieve the ultimate objective of this Agreement  to limit global warming to well below 2C and to pursue efforts to further limit the temperature increase to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, through the periodic updating and enhancing of its Nationally Determined Contributions. Dominica, like many other Small Island Developing States, acknowledges its increased vulnerability to the adverse impacts of climate change and recognises that beyond our efforts to mitigate this threat, we must also adapt to and become resilient against its impacts. Recalling, the passage of hurricane Maria in 2017, which resulted in the destruction of over 90% of our islands infrastructure and homes, as well as over 85% loss of forest cover, Dominica set on a path to become the Worlds First Climate-Resilient Nation.

Dominica has begun its journey to climate resilience, as evidenced by the establishment of the Climate Resilience Execution Agency for Dominica, passing of the Climate Resilience Act, development of the Climate Change and Natural Resource Development Bill, and the development of renewable (geothermal) energy resources, which together form the backbone for climate-resilience. This NDC update is holistic in nature through the development of targets for all three pillars of climate action  mitigation, adaptation and resilience; as a show of our commitment. Mitigation actions are focused on the development of our geothermal energy resources, to support our target for 100% renewable energy by 2030, as well as enhanced forest and soil carbon sequestration. Adaptation actions are focused on preparing our agricultural, ecological, natural, health, social and economic systems to withstand the potential adverse impacts. Resilient actions are focused on rebuilding stronger: our communities, institutional systems, economy, homes, infrastructure, natural assets, mindsets, energy sector and agricultural sector through the establishment of Dominica as a Global Centre for Agricultural Resilience. Recognising that our citizens will be affected not only by the impacts of climate change but also by the measures adopted to respond to it, our approach has been country- driven, gender-responsive and participatory with considerations for vulnerable groups and the Kalinago community, to allow just transition of the workforce and support the shift to sustainable, low-carbon and climate-resilient development. Dominicans have realised that we can achieve much more working together than working independently and now more than ever we will continue to stand together and repeat our mantra Dominicans, stronger together!

By this submission, the Commonwealth of Dominica, communicates an updated and enhanced Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) in acknowledgement of Article 4 of the Paris Agreement1, with a total greenhouse gas emissions reduction of 45% below 2014 levels by 2030. This updated NDC and its accompanying information replaces the 2015 NDC and as of the date of receipt by the Secretariat, will be considered as the current NDC. Despite challenges, the commitment to enhanced action and ambition, as well as lessons learnt affords the nation the opportunity to still maintain, if not surpass its 2030 target.

Dominicas NDC is unique by the inclusion of targets for all three pillars of climate action: mitigation, adaptation and resilience. Figure 1 illustrates Dominicas enhanced mitigation action in its updated NDC compared to its previous submission in 2015. As a display of its determination to become the worlds first climate-resilient nation, this NDC has been enhanced through strengthened and additional targets and actions across all three pillars, as shown in figure 2.

Climate change action is enshrined in law through the development of the Climate Change, Environment and Natural Resource Management Bill 2020, which provides the overarching enabling framework to facilitate Dominicas transition to low-carbon climate-resilient development.

This NDC in its entirety is conditional upon the receipt of timely access to international climate change financing, technology development and transfer, as well as capacity building support for priority mitigation, adaptation and resilience measures. Recalling also Article 4.8 of the Agreement, as well as decision 4/CMA12 and its Annex I, the Commonwealth of Dominica also provides supplemental descriptive, explanative and contextual information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding (table 13) of the updated NDC.

The Commonwealth of Dominica has taken the decision for the adaptation and resilience components of the NDC to constitute a part of its official Adaptation Communication, along with the National Climate Change Policy and Action Plan, 2019-2024 (draft), which is intended to constitute Dominicas National Action Plan (NAP) in compliance with Decision 9/CMA13. including:

The Commonwealth of Dominica, located at 15 north latitude and 61 west longitude, occupies a central position between the French Territories of Guadeloupe and Martinique to the north and south respectively. The island was formed by volcanic activity, which persists as evidenced by ongoing earthquakes, and the presence of sulphuric springs and steam vents. Known for its rich and diverse natural environment, Dominica has been nicknamed the Nature Island of the Caribbean. Dominica is part of a group of 47 countries and territories which have been classified by the United Nations (UN) as Small Island Developing States (SIDS), which face a multitude of unique challenges and are particularly vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change.

Dominicas climate is characterized as tropical maritime with characteristically warm temperatures and intense rainfall. Annually, the climate is distinguished only by rainfall amounts, with a dry season from December to May and a wet season from June to November. The islands vegetation is lush and dense, owing to the topography and high rainfall amounts which has an annual average ranging from ~1,900 mm in coastal areas to ~5,000 mm in inland areas.

The rugged topography results in considerable amounts of orographic rainfall, making it the wettest island in the eastern Caribbean with annual rainfall totals exceeding 10,000 mm (400 inches) in some of the higher elevations and rendering the island susceptible to landslides particularly in mountainous areas. The steep, mountainous terrain alters temperatures, winds and rainfall which results in a number of micro-climates. Dominicas position within the Atlantic hurricane belt combined with its climate, makes it vulnerable to hydrometeorological hazards.

Dominica was originally populated by Amerindian peoples, known as Kalinago. This is the only island in the Caribbean that still possesses distinct communities of these indigenous people. There is a reserve in the eastern portion of the island referred to as the Kalinago Territory. The population consists mainly of African and mixed African/European descent, with European, Syrian and Kalinago minorities. Large expanses of mountainous topography have limited human settlements to narrow coastal areas particularly in the south and west with approximately 44,000 persons (62%) living along the coast prior to Hurricane Maria.

Dominicas economy reflects many of the traditional features of a small open economy, which includes a high level of dependence on external trade as a proportion of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), dependence on single sector export products (in this case agriculture) and tourism revenue. Dominicas main export of agricultural goods include bananas, cereal and pellets, tropical fruits, cassava, citrus, beer, pasta, spices, and vegetables. Although the economy is described as predominantly agricultural, the country is actively exploring prospects in tourism and is also developing the production of geothermal energy. Despite a stable macroeconomic environment, growth has been limited by natural disasters and by international economic developments4. Economic growth in Dominica averaged approximately 3.7% per annum, dropping to 1.5% by 2015 before suffering further decline after Tropical Storm Erika (2015) and Hurricane Maria (2017) resulting in a 9.5 percent decline in GDP for 2017.

Dominica has always been in a vulnerable position economically, socially, culturally, and environmentally. It has been classified among the worlds most vulnerable countries5, given its susceptibility to natural hazards  hydrometeorological and geophysical; as well as its ecological and economic fragility. Dominica is particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change and extreme weather events. These include the projected increased frequency and magnitude of tropical storms, extreme weather events (flood, drought and heatwaves), unfamiliar rainfall patterns (seasonality and total amounts), sea level rise and heightened storm surges; and the devastating multitude of impacts on lives and livelihoods. Vulnerability to climate change in Dominica, like many other SIDS, is aggravated by external pressures affecting its resilience and adaptive capacity. This includes trade, (positive and negative) impacts of globalization, financial crises, international conflicts, external debt, as well as internal conditions such as population growth, poverty, political instability, unemployment, reduced social cohesion and a widening gap between the rich and poor and their interactions.

Recognising the threats posed by climate change, Dominica has adopted several initiatives to respond to it. In this context, Dominica has established a strong record for climate change adaptation and was one of the few countries chosen to pilot adaptation measures under the Special Program on Adaptation to Climate Change (SPACC). Additionally, as a collaborative initiative between the SPACC program and the Sustainable Land Management (SLM) project funded by the Global Environmental Facility (GEF), Dominica has pioneered: i) vulnerability mapping and climate proofing of National Parks Management Plans, and ii) community-based vulnerability mapping and development of community-level adaptation plans, through community engagement and input. In addition, the National Adaptive Capacity Assessment under the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR), identified considerable multi-level limitations in climate change risk management capacity: a) systematic, institutional and individual; b) national, sectoral, district and local; c) and within the public sector and civil society.

Key challenges include:

Critical infrastructure in the country is vulnerable to significant loss and damage from  Lack of systems, expertise and facilities to collect, store and analyse relevant information  Inadequate knowledge and awareness of potential impact of climate change and lack of  Policies, laws, rules and regulations related to climate change and disaster risk reduction  Planning for coordinated response to climate change and disaster risk reduction activities Dominicas SPCR is being implemented under the US$35 million Disaster Vulnerability Reduction Project (DVRP) which was officially launched in September 2014. The DVRP is funded by the World Bank, International Development Association (IDA), PPCR, Strategic Climate Fund (SCF) and the Government of the Commonwealth of Dominica. The total approved financing is US$39.5 million.

A climate change risk assessment was undertaken under the National Capacity Self- Assessment (NCSA) and the vulnerability assessments undertaken to develop Dominicas Climate Change Adaptation Policy and National Communications. The climate change risk assessment was modelled on the process outlined in the Risk Management Guidelines for Climate Change Adaptation Decision Making6. Using a multiple criteria analysis7, each PPCR Technical Working Group (TWG) undertook a sector specific assessment as follows: 6 Developed under the Mainstreaming Adaptation to Climate Change and Adapting to Climate Change in the Caribbean projects funded by GEF/World Bank/CIDA. 2003.

7 The following criteria were considered by stakeholders to assess climate change risks: magnitude of impacts, timing of impacts, persistence and reversibility of impacts, likelihood (estimates of uncertainty) of impacts and vulnerabilities, and confidence in those estimates, potential for adaptation, distributional aspects of impacts and vulnerabilities, importance of the system(s) at risk.

Through this climate change risk assessment, national stakeholders identified the following as priority climate change risks:

Increase in extreme events (increased intensity of hurricanes, flooding, landslides) - increased damage to houses, human settlements, critical infrastructure, business and other properties Increased frequency of extreme events - water shortages due to increased drought and storms (including loss to crops) Sea level rise and storm surge - loss of coral reefs, loss of protection to coastal areas and impact of marine ecosystem and associated effect on livelihoods and food security Climate variability - loss and impact on marine and terrestrial biodiversity, a key pillar of the tourism sector Changes in rainfall intensity - increased coastal marine habitat degradation and damage to fisheries infrastructure Increased climate variability - changes in fish and marine mammal migration patterns affecting food security and tourism Changes in rainfall patterns - increased incidence of landslides affecting houses, human settlements and infrastructure, in addition to costs for insurance and building loans Increase in extreme events - damage to coastal property and infrastructure due to storm surges Increase in extreme events - reduced availability of international donor funding due to increased demand for emergency assistance from vulnerable countries Changes in national and local temperature regimes - increased damage to buildings and water cisterns from extreme dry conditions Sea level rise combined with increased incidence of storm surges - increased costs for insurance, re-insurance and costs to banks providing loans for coastal infrastructure Increased climate variability - increased land degradation (temperature variations) - impacts on food production, water quality, health and nutrition Increased climate variability - decline in tourist arrivals due to more mild conditions affecting winter tourism market Increase in extreme events - damage to water infrastructure and impact on costs for water supply *Ranking is based on a scale from 1 to 10, with 1 being the lowest and 10 the highest8.

Dominicas Protected Areas (PAs) play a critical role in both disaster prevention and recovery by maintaining intact and healthy ecosystems necessary to mitigate natural disasters. Intact habitats and vegetation help stabilize soils, reducing floods, drought, and landslide occurrences as well as sedimentation runoff and provide a physical barrier for coastal inundation. While Dominicas national PAs are important contributors to Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR), PAs themselves are also at risk from climate change and natural hazards. A risk analysis of climate change and natural hazards to Dominicas PAs is presented in table 2.

Recently, Dominica was struck by two extreme events which severely tested the countrys climate change adaptation preparedness and resilience readiness. Tropical Storm Erika struck Dominica on August 27th, 2015 resulting in heavy rainfall, flooding, and landslides. In its wake, hundreds of homes were left uninhabitable and thousands of people were displaced. Thirty people died across the island in the nation's worst disaster since Hurricane David. Tropical Storm Erika resulted in total damage and loss of EC$1.3 billion (US$483 million), equivalent to approximately 90% of Dominicas GDP. Two years later, hurricane Maria made landfall in Dominica on September 18th, 2017 as a Category 5 hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 165 mph (265 km/h) - the most extreme hurricane to ever impact the island. Hurricane Maria resulted in extensive damage to roads and public buildings, including schools, stores and churches, with the entire population being affected in some form. Hurricane Maria accounted for damage in the order of ~226% of GDP, which resulted in a 14.7% decline in GDP. Dominicans acknowledge that their strength is in the resiliency of their people and therefore remain committed in their climate ambition and action, recognising also that the cost of action outweighs the cost of loss and damage responses to inaction. See Box 1 for further details on costs of action and inaction.

Solar Photovoltaic (PV) Conversion Programme for Commercial, Institutional and Manufacturing Facilities Replace Streetlights in Portsmouth with Off-grid Light Emitting Diode (LED) Fixtures Off-Grid Hybrid Wind, Solar, Biodiesel Generator Back-up in Off-grid Mini-grid Configuration for Dominicas South-East and East Coasts According to Dominicas CRRP, the cost of no action to reduce climate vulnerability at the national level would be loss and damage equivalent to 77% of GDP by 2100. The cost of taking no concerted action to address the impacts of climate change for Dominica would be loss and damage equivalent to: 6.3% of GDP by 2025, 34.3% of GDP by 2050, 54.4% of GDP by 2075 and 77.3% of GDP by 2100. This is significantly higher than the average projected cost in the Caribbean.

3 Climate Action Timeline In 1994, the Commonwealth of Dominica ratified the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)9, hereinafter referred to as the Convention. The ultimate objective of the Convention is to achieve stabilisation of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system; and within a sufficient timeframe to facilitate natural adaptation of ecosystems, ensure food security and sustainable economic development. In fulfilment of one of the obligations under Article 12 of the UNFCCC, Dominica committed to the submission of regular National Communications to the Conference of Parties (COP) through the UNFCCC Secretariat. The first such report, the Initial National Communication (INC) was submitted in 2001. The INC included the following greenhouse gases (GHGs): carbon-dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous-oxide (N2O); and non-GHGs: non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs) and nitrogen- oxides (NOx) and covered the following sectors: Energy, Industrial Processes, Agriculture, Land- Use and Forestry, and Waste.

Dominica began its preparation for the Second National Communication (SNC) in 2006 and submitted in 2012. The SNC reported on the period from 2001 to 2005 and included all the GHGs previously reported in the INC, as well as: hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), indirect GHGs:

Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC) was submitted in 2015, which later became Dominicas NDC upon ratification of the Paris Agreement. The INDC covered the following GHGs: CO2, CH4, N2O and HFCs and covered the following sectors: Energy Industries;

Transport; Manufacturing and Construction; Commercial/Institutional, Residential, Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing; and Solid Waste. The Third National Communication (TNC) submitted in 2020, reported on the period 2005 to 2017. The TNC included an emissions inventory for the following GHGs: CO2, CH4, N2O, NMVOC, SO2 and HFCs during the reporting period, as well as climate mitigation and resilience measures. These were in part through measures to implement Dominicas Low-Carbon Climate-Resilient Development Strategy (LCCRDS), including through building the legal and institutional capacity to manage impacts from climate change.

The landmark Paris Agreement was reached at the 21st Conference of Parties (COP21)10, aiming to combat climate change and to accelerate and intensify actions and investments needed for a low-carbon future. The Paris Agreement, which builds upon the Convention, has an overall objective to strengthen the global response to the threat of climate change by limiting global temperature rise this century to well below 2C above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to further limit the temperature increase to 1.5C through ambitious mitigation actions. In addition, the Paris Agreement establishes measures to increase the ability of nations to adapt to the adverse impacts of climate change and foster climate-resilient development through consistent finance flows. The Paris Agreement was signed by the Government of Dominica in April 2016 and ratified in September of the same year, with the INDC now becoming the nations NDC.

In 2015, in accordance with relevant paragraphs of Decisions 1/CP1911 and 1/CP2012 towards achieving the ultimate objective of Article 2 of the Convention, the Government of Dominica committed through its INDC13, to a progressive reduction of total greenhouse gas emissions below 2014 levels at the following reduction rates: 17.9% by 2020, 39.2% by 2025 and 44.7% by 2030. Total emissions reduction per sector were outlined as follows: Energy Industries  98.6% (principally from harnessing of geothermal resources); Transport  100%; Manufacturing and Construction  8.8%; Commercial/Institutional, Residential, Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing  8.1%; and Solid Waste  78.6%.

Dominica, as part of the INDC also included additional mitigation measures which included:

Dominicas geothermal resources, which will, from 2025 onwards, enable the country to export significant amounts of renewable energy  estimated to exceed 200Gg annually, to the nearby French Territories of Martinique and Guadeloupe; thereby contributing to the global stocktake under Article 14 of the Paris Agreement.

This was communicated as a conditional submission, dependent upon receiving timely access to international climate change financing, technology development and transfer; and capacity building support for priority adaptation and mitigation measures. These contributions highlighted that for Dominica, there is little distinction between adaptation and mitigation measures and therefore an integrated response would be implemented to build climate-resilience in vulnerable communities, while enabling green growth through the transition to sustainable energy technologies.

4 Enhanced Transparency Framework In accordance with Decision 18/CMA.114 and its annex (the Katowice Climate Package), as well as Article 13 under the Paris Agreement, Dominica provides an updated NDC containing information under the Enhanced Transparency Framework15 (ETF), which details a set of Modalities, Procedures and Guidelines (MPGs) to build trust and confidence; and strengthen the global response to the threat of climate change. The NDC planning process, progress in the development of the necessary frameworks for climate action and the NDC Implementation Plan are summarised in sections 4.1 and 4.2. Further details on climate action: mitigation, adaptation and resilience, in light of the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2 and also Article 7; and progress in NDC implementation are provided in chapters 5, 6 and 7. In addition, information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding of Dominicas NDC, and details on support received and needed in the context of climate change actions under Articles 4, 7 and 11 is also provided.

The review and updating of Dominicas NDC was led by the Ministry of Environment, Rural Modernization and Kalinago Upliftment, in close collaboration with the Climate Resilience Execution Agency for Dominica (CREAD) and facilitated by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) under the Climate Promise initiative. The NDC planning process involved an assessment of the level of progress towards national and sectoral targets, identification of areas for enhanced climate ambition and action, priority capacity needs to support just transition of the workforce; and barriers to target achievement and implementation. These assessments informed a national stakeholder capacity development exercise, which included an institutional capacity assessment to identify critical skills and knowledge gaps for NDC implementation.

This phase involved the identification of the existing or emerging regulatory, institutional and systematic frameworks to facilitate climate action and NDC implementation. In addition, the level of synergies and coherence between institutions and policies, as well as the level of mainstreaming and alignment with national processes and plans; and other global agreements were also assessed. An institutional capacity assessment was conducted to identify areas for capacity building.

Stakeholders also provided feedback on capacity building requirements necessary for NDC action and implementation.

Recognising the importance of increased national awareness and participation in the NDC process at all levels of society and stages of development, an inclusive approach was adopted.

Stakeholder engagement included a broad range of individuals from the public sector, private sector, government officials, non-governmental organisations (NGOs), community-based organisations (CBOs) and civil society. This process was achieved through the use of online surveys, individual key informant interviews and group consultations. These consultations afforded national stakeholders with an opportunity to report on relevant community-based, sectoral and national level initiatives and activities, provide input to the climate change negotiations, engage with members of the Government and negotiators whilst also suggesting ideas to government for filling of any gaps that may exist in Dominicas approach to the Paris negotiations. It also provided an opportunity for stakeholders to engage in the work done on enhancing NDCs and provide their inputs on what targets they would like to be incorporated into the NDC and what should be put forward as Dominicas contribution. This process further enhanced the culture of a sustainable national dialogue, provided a platform for all stakeholders who have an interest in climate change negotiations and also serves to increase acceptance of implementation measures.

An assessment of the level of progress in NDC implementation was conducted, as well as identification of barriers to progress. Experiences and lessons learnt, combined with technological advancements and new financial partnerships and collaborations led to the revision and updating of targets, to reflect the incorporation of new sectoral, sub-sectoral and non-sectoral targets, as well as opportunities for enhanced ambition with pre-existing targets.

An extensive literature review was performed making use of sectoral, national and regional documents, as well as international communications. This included, inter alia, Acts, Bills, Policies, Plans and Strategies.

The Covid-19 pandemic has disrupted lives and livelihoods globally, presenting Governments with new and intensified challenges. This has resulted in negative impacts not only on health and the economy but also on climate action under SDG 13 and the Paris Agreement. Significant funds necessary for financing climate action in developing countries has been diverted to combat the pandemic, resulting in climate action and NDC submission delays. The stakeholder engagement aspect of the NDC review and drafting process has also been affected by the pandemic, with all activities being performed virtually.

Driven by Dominicas determination to become the worlds first climate-resilient nation, there have been significant advancements in the development of the supporting institutional, regulatory and systematic frameworks for NDC implementation. Successful NDC implementation requires inter-ministerial and inter-sectoral coordination, new or updated laws and policies, financial support and continuous monitoring and evaluation. The Government of Dominica has shown its commitment to climate action through the development of institutional, regulatory and systematic frameworks, upon which successful NDC implementation hinges on. Dominicas mainstreaming of climate change into national and sectoral development planning is evident in their strong track record of regulatory development and alignment with other global agreements, obligations and goals such as the Sustainable Development Agenda 2030 and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, institutional strengthening and project development. In addition, Dominica is in the process of expanding its Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRV) system for mitigation action and developing a Monitoring and Evaluation (ME) framework for adaptation and resilience.

Duties of the Council on Environment, Climate Change and Development include:

Oversight of the implementation and periodic revision of Dominicas Nationally Determined  Facilitating consultation and co-operation between government departments and the public  Directing the formulation of national policies on sustainable development, environmental  Co-ordinating the integration of climate change considerations into the environmental impact  Providing direction and guidance on the formulation and implementation of national and sector policies to support the transition to low carbon climate resilient development  Monitoring and reviewing of, and reporting on national efforts to achieve the transition to low The Council on Environment, Climate Change and Development shall constitute the National Climate Change Committee, comprising:

(a) The Director of the Department of Climate Change, Environment and Development who shall Operating as a statutory government agency, the Climate Resilience Execution Agency for Dominica (CREAD) leads and coordinates strategic initiatives across sectors in the Commonwealth of Dominica with the goal of making the country the worlds first climate-resilient nation. CREAD acts to bolster the ability of the business community, public services and social sector partners to build strong and resilient communities, develop adaptive infrastructure, accelerate economic growth, strengthen institutional systems, enhance Dominicans capacity to respond to the local impacts of global climate change, and set an example for the rest of the world on how to respond to the challenges of a changing climate.

Table (3): Institutional, Regulatory and Systematic Frameworks in support of the NDC Implementation Plan Dominica has prioritised sustainable development, as evidenced by the many projects in the pipeline to ensure achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030. Climate change poses unique threats to sustainable development, however, Dominicas Citizenship by Investment (CBI) Program16 has been a crucial element in funding many of the projects that have put them well on track to attain the SDGs and which also have climate change adaptation, resilience and mitigation co-benefits17.

Through the Centre of Excellence for Data in Resilience Decision-Making, a dedicated Geographical Information Systems (GIS) unit within the Ministry of Economic Affairs, Planning, Resilience and Sustainable Development will be established. This will centralize the gathering of data (GIS and beyond), and institutionalize a data-driven approach to all key planning decisions. This unit will be critical to the finalization and implementation of the Resilient Dominica Physical Plan, including activities related to land management, hazard mapping and infrastructure planning.

In order to achieve the Governments climate-resilience vision, sectoral policies, strategies and budgets - notable the PSIP - must be synchronized to Dominicas climate-resilience targets specified in the CRRP, along with globally-recognized SDGs. This will require adjustments to the budget- setting process and criteria, to include the definition and weighting of resilience- and SDG-related indicators. It will also focus on putting into place efficient and effective organizational structures and operating procedures to enable delivery on resilience agenda. A public service where there is a culture of continuous improvement will be developed, public officers will better understand how they can and should contribute to strategic objectives and their performance will be measured so as to incentivize such outputs and outcomes.

Measurement, Reporting and Verification systems play a significant role in effectively tracking and improving the implementation of mitigation goals and policies articulated under countries' NDCs. MRVs are foundational to the national and global response to climate change and will enable Dominica to meet its international reporting requirements such as National Communications, Biennial Update Reports, and National GHG inventories. The initial phase involves the measurement and monitoring of data and information on greenhouse gas emission estimates, mitigation actions and support received. This is followed by reporting of data collected through the development of national inventories. The final stage involves periodic verification of the data via an independent review and assessment to establish accuracy and reliability. The MRV system for the forestry sector was recently developed. Measurement and monitoring will take place using the Collect Earth tool for the annual assessment of land-use and land-use changes, the reporting process will be facilitated by the GHG inventory, which will be updated annually; and verification will be through the UNFCCC REDD+ Technical Assessment (refer to section 5.2.1.1 for further details). A MRV system for HFCs has also been developed to establish a usage baseline, update emissions estimates and formulate a phase-down plan.

There are also plans for the development of a MRV system for the transportation sector under the Low-Carbon Transport Dominica Project (refer to Box 8 and table 12).

Dominica is also in the process of developing a Monitoring and Evaluation framework for all climate change adaptation and resilience actions under the Paris Agreement. This will support all projects under the Public Sector Investment Program. A ME framework for the agriculture sector has been developed through the National Agriculture Policy (NAGP), which will facilitate effective management and oversight of its implementation. Refer to section 7.2 for further details. A ME framework, within the context of climate change, is a tool to support the understanding and prioritization of adaptation and resilience actions to assist in decision-making.

It facilitates the measurement and assessment of the performance of systems in place, in order to effectively manage development results, contributing to evidence-based decision-making.

Well-designed and functioning institutional frameworks are the basis for successful decarbonization of the economy, to support ambitious climate action, enhance adaptive capacity and strengthen resilience. In this regard, the Government of Dominica has undertaken a national institutional capacity assessment to identify critical skills and knowledge gaps for NDC Implementation. This assessment will increase capacity in areas such as project management, intra- and inter-agency coordination, development of methodological procedures and guidelines, decision-support tools, stakeholder management, monitoring and evaluation skills and systems to support NDC implementation.

To achieve its ambitious emissions reduction target and support the transition to low-emission, climate-resilient development, Dominica recognises that its workforce will be impacted. The transition to an environmentally sustainable economy and society presents major opportunities, as well as challenges for the nation. As a result, the impacts18 of mitigation, adaptation and resilience policies and measures on the workforce and on the creation of decent work and quality jobs has been taken into consideration. Dominica strives for the transition towards an inclusive and low-carbon economy to be just and fair, while at the same time maximising opportunities for economic prosperity, social justice, rights and social protection for all, leaving no one behind. It is also recognised that just transition will help in the achievement of the sustainable development goals, specifically goals 1, 3 and 8. In this regard, Dominica has undertaken a multi-sectoral capacity-gaps assessment for the whole of the economy in support of the just transition, as well as an assessment of the financial requirements to achieve this.

Tables 13, 15 and 17 present some of the capacity gaps and the financial support required.

Mainstreaming gender equality in support of a more inclusive approach to climate action offers Dominica a pathway to more effective, climate-resilient action. The Government of Dominica recognises that women, as well as vulnerable groups (elderly, disabled etc.) are disproportionately affected by the negative impacts of climate change, while at the same time represent an underexploited and, in some instances, untapped resource. In this regard, important steps have been taken to harness the knowledge, strength and contributions of all people, understand the gender-differentiated impacts of climate change, empower all persons regardless of gender to manage and respond to climate risks through the development of a draft NDC Gender Mainstreaming Roadmap (GMR). This GMR will guide the integration of gender across institutional and coordination mechanisms, which support NDC implementation among Ministries of the Commonwealth of Dominica (refer to Box 2 for further details).

The Government commits to build on previous resolutions and advance the commitments made within national, regional and international frameworks including the 2006 National Policy and Action Plan for Gender Equity and Equality, the Beijing Platform for Action, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, Commonwealth Plan of Action for Gender and Development, OAS/CIM Inter-American Commission on Women, CARICOM Plan of Action and the Sustainable Development Goals. The approach recognises the need to take social and economic differences between men and women into account to ensure that proposed policies and programs have intended and fair results for men, women, boys and girls. The vulnerability of women and other vulnerable groups was a key determinant in adopting a focus on vulnerable communities, as identified within the Household and Vulnerability Communities 18 In the context of the impacts of climate change policies on employment, there are two types: quantitative impacts  number of jobs impacted and qualitative impacts  quality of jobs created or transformed.

Survey, the cornerstone of Dominicas SPCR. As outlined in Dominicas LCCRDS, the key measures required to address the vulnerability of women to climate change impacts include:

Provision of social safety nets in the form of micro-finance and micro-insurance to assist women in rebuilding homes, businesses and lives after an extreme event.

In addition, several strategies which Government will advance gender equality and inclusion through are found within the NRDS19 and the CRRP20. Projects developed under the CRRP will promote gender equality meaning that women, men, girls and boys enjoy the same human rights status, have equal opportunities, equal access and control over resources and equal participation in decision making. Delivery entities will apply the principles of equality to project design and operation. Under the NRDS, gender equality will be enhanced through the following strategies:

Accelerate the approval of the National Policy and Action Plan for Gender Equity and Equality which makes special consideration for emerging and relevant gendered issues  Strengthen capacity-building opportunities for women, girls, and vulnerable groups to scale  Design gender-specific programs for men while ensuring these do not put women at a  Ensure sustainability of efforts by promoting gender sensitivity education and training to build  Reinforce priorities around poverty reduction, promotion of justice and economic and social empowerment of women and girls informal sector work and contraceptive use to ensure  Support gender sensitive research, analysis and development of a highly disaggregated  Enhance capacity to monitor and assess progress in meeting gender equality commitments specified in international and regional treaties and conventions, as well as in the Government recognises that delivery systems under the CRRP must be attuned to the challenges and obstacles faced by vulnerable, as well as, disadvantaged groups and take special measures to protect these. Climate change will have severe impacts for the Kalinago people due to the vulnerability of the community. Government also recognizes that the Kalinago people have consistently remained the most significantly disadvantaged group in Dominica. The entire way of life and culture of the Kalinago is under threat from climate change, with impacts on the Territories economy and natural resources resulting in increased poverty and hardship.

Government, therefore, acknowledges its responsibilities to the Kalinago peoples and is committed to working and supporting them in the realization of self-determination and other human rights as outlined in the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.

Government promises to pursue the integration of indigenous peoples perspectives, cultures and language into mainstream policies, plans and programs in order to reverse the factors that marginalize them in many contexts and systematically change their lives for the better.

Government takes notes of the successes and innovations of the Kalinago people, particularly their remarkable ability to preserve a culture which has been threatened in several contexts, demonstrating their history of resilience and have proposed specific strategies in the NRDS, which fall under capacity building, promotion of social justice and preservation of culture. Priority climate change adaptation measures have been identified in collaboration with the Kalinago Group to reduce threats to the people, culture, livelihoods and existence of the Kalinago Territory:

Design and implementation of wide-spread education and awareness program to sensitize  Establishment of a climate change easy access trust fund specifically for the Kalinago people to assist in climate change measures to address threats to agriculture production,  Construction of community disaster shelters to house persons in time of disaster  Identification and construction of a landing site in the Territory for the fishermen who are  Establishment of measures to address impacts on the resilience of natural resources  Prevention of construction of houses and roads in vulnerable areas and ensure buildings Under the Comprehensive Risk Management Framework and Sustainable Climate Change Financing component of the SPCR, micro-finance and micro-insurance was established for the private sector and vulnerable segments of society including: farmers, fisherfolk, women and vulnerable communities in particular the Kalinago people.

Attracting and engaging Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is an important pillar of economic development particularly for developing countries. Dominica has been exemplary in leveraging support from major funding bodies, including, inter alia, Green Climate Fund (GCF), Global Environment Fund (GEF), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Clean Technology Fund (CTF) and the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB). These funding bodies play a major role in supporting climate action and helping Dominica achieve its NDC commitments.

The Climate Change and Environment Trust Fund will be administered by the Department of Environment, Climate Change and Development. It will be used solely to finance:

The implementation of:

Community climate change adaptation and mitigation measures consistent with Dominicas  Development and implementation of policies formulated pursuant to section 14 of the Climate Change, Environment and Natural Resource Management Bill - debt for nature  Protection of carbon sinks pursuant to the provisions of the United Nations Framework  Expenses incurred in any environmental audit, inspection or monitoring including the  Expenses incurred in any alternate dispute resolution process that may be established under the provisions of this Act including the fees of any mediator, arbitrator of facilitator This fund seeks to support the development of viable and sustainable businesses based on or linked to Dominicas rich marine environment. It will tap private and social sector investment, steering it towards commercial or quasi-commercial ventures that support the overall climate resilience ambitions of the Government. Managed by a dedicated, objective and credible Investment Committee with experience in high-impact investing in the blue economy, it will provide social, environmental and financial returns (that is, a triple bottom line) to meet the expectations of a range of investors. It will be complemented by a technical assistance fund to support the development or expansion of innovative business in the sector.

Five priority areas have been identified for Implementation, Monitoring and Reporting on Gender Mainstreaming and Climate under the GMR. These are as follows:  Capacity-building, knowledge management and communication  Gender balance, participation and womens leadership  Coherence  Gender-responsive implementation and means of exchange and promoting economic growth. International financial support through this bilateral agreement, enables the Government of Dominica to build a clean and resilient energy system and reinforces their commitment to become the worlds first climate-resilient country.

Under the Comprehensive Risk Management Framework and Sustainable Climate Change Financing component of Dominicas Strategic Program for Climate Resilience, a Climate Change Trust Fund (CCTF) is to be established. The CCTF is expected to provide support to priority community climate change risk management measures identified through community vulnerability mapping and adaptation planning. Climate Change and Environment Trust Fund will be administered by the Department of Environment, Climate Change and Development. It will be used solely to finance: The implementation of:

(i) Dominicas Nationally Determined Contributions (ii) Dominica`s Low Carbon Climate Resilient  Building capacity and capability to design, structure and finance sustainable projects carbon, and climate service companies - Grants and contingent grants for feasibility studies The Jamaican Government is exploring the bond market as a source of debt capital to finance innovative and new business opportunities to enhance resilience, through the establishment of a GCF-funded Project: Caribbean Green Bond Listing on the Jamaica Stock Exchange (JSE). This green bond market has the potential to attract local, regional and international investors who can leverage support for climate resilience and low-carbon development.

JSE has the potential to be a primary regional financial institution, facilitating transformative low-carbon development regionally. The Commonwealth of Dominica has specifically expressed interest in collaborating with this readiness grant proposal and noted that the objectives of the proposal are fully aligned to the countrys priorities. Dominicas LCCRDS calls for sustainable financing for low carbon technologies and energy conservation. The introduction of the green bond market has the potential to attract potential investors to support renewable energy initiatives, including use of geothermal energy. The optimal utilization of these for: (i) geothermal power production, interisland electricity export via undersea cable, the establishment of Green Industrial Eco Parks, electric transportation and other usage, is central to the success of its low carbon development pathway.

The Government of Dominica has made a commitment to the progressive reduction of total GHG emissions at the following rates: 39% by 2025 and 45% by 2030 below 201421 levels. These overall targets do not include the LULUCF sector. Sectoral GHG emission reduction targets by 2030 have also been identified as shown below:

The Government of Dominica has set a target to reduce HFCs emissions by 10% by 2030, based on a recently completed baseline consumption and phase-down assessment. Additional non-greenhouse gas targets have also been identified for renewable energy (section 5.2.2), as well as the LULUCF (section 5.2.1) and Agriculture (section 5.2.3.1) sectors. For renewable energy, Dominica has set a target of 100% renewable energy usage by 2030, principally from the harnessing of geothermal resources, as well as synthetic fuels when it becomes feasible (refer to Box 7). In addition, the commercial development of Dominicas geothermal resources, will from 2027 onwards, facilitate export to the nearby French Territories of Martinique and Guadeloupe (estimated to exceed 200Gg annually), contributing to the global stocktake under Article 14. This is projected to result in ~39.3Gg emissions reduction. For the LULUCF sector, the overall target has been defined as 980% increase in carbon sequestration above 201822 levels by 2030. Benefitting from forest conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of carbon stocks as guided by the Warsaw framework for REDD+, it is projected that forests in Dominica will regenerate and will sequester ~648Gg carbon annually during the 21 The overall greenhouse gas emissions reduction target of 45% by 2030 below the 2014 baseline estimate includes estimates from the following sectors: Energy, Agriculture, Waste and Industrial Processes, as well as contributions from additional sectors for which estimates are not yet available. 22 As the emissions and removals for the period 2000-2017 in the updated national GHG inventory for the LULUCF sector were based on a forest that no longer exists and the post-hurricane conditions are different, the historical average of emissions could not be used to represent the expected future emissions or removals. 2018 was therefore defined as the reference year for this sector.

The GHGs covered by Dominicas NDC include:

Dominicas TNC submitted in 2020 presented a GHG inventory with estimates for the period 2005 to 2017, as shown in table 4. These estimates were calculated based on the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National GHG Inventories. However, default emission factors were used which presented a certain level of uncertainties in the estimates. Figure 3 shows the Business as Usual (BAU) scenario for the period 2005 to 2030, total and sectoral emissions from 2005 to 2030. The Communication, which provided emission changes from 2000 to 2005 as the starting point. The projections for sectoral emissions post 2014, were derived from the application of the energy 23 Having lost most of its forest cover following the passage of hurricane Maria, Dominicas efforts during the period 2020-2025 will be mainly focused on reforestation activities. However, it is anticipated that from 2025 when much of the forest has been restored, some level of sustainable deforestation may begin.

Consumption Freeze 2024 - 22,446 Stage I 2029 10% 20,201 Stage II 2035 30% 15,712 Stage III 2040 50% 11,223 Stabilisation 2045 80% 4,489 These mitigation targets will be achieved through a comprehensive suite of sectoral mitigation measures, including the development of Dominicas geothermal resources for local and commercial purposes and synthetic fuels (refer to Box 7), an aggressive reforestation program accompanied by sustainable forest management (refer to Box 6), capacity building activities, supported by the establishment of necessary regulatory, institutional and systematic frameworks.

This section presents the progress towards achieving the 2020 mitigation target of 17.9% greenhouse gas emissions reduction below 2014 levels. Dominica is still in the early stages of NDC implementation, which has been met with several challenges. Several mitigation measures have already been implemented, with further details provided in table 13. Based on preliminary estimates, the 2020 target has not been achieved. Table 6 below shows progress towards the 2020 target based on available data. Percentages have been calculated using the updated emissions baseline and GHG Inventory Data24 for the period 2015 to 2017. The GHG inventories for the period 2006 to 2017 were compiled using the 2006 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate change (IPCC) Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories as a component of the TNC. The following direct GHG - carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), and partially fluorinated hydrocarbons (HFCs) and the indirect GHGs - non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOC) and sulphur dioxide (SO2) were included.

Table (6): Total aggregate GHG mitigation progress in relation to the 2020 target in relation to the updated baseline estimate and excluding the LULUCF sector Carbon sequestration estimates for the LULUCF sector started at ~1296Gg CO2e in 2020, with further annual estimates of ~648Gg CO2e. Refer to section 5.2.1 for further details.

- Geothermal Resources Development Bill is in the final stages of review before being presented to Parliament. - The regulatory framework for harnessing and export has been established. - Capacity development for harnessing and export has been completed. - Site assessments and feasibility studies have been carried out, which indicate that the energy capacity in the Roseau Valley Geothermal Resource area is at least 300 MW. The current production capacity based on wells already drilled is approximately 11 MW. - The geothermal resource potential of the Wotten Waven-Trafalgar-Laudat geothermal field was confirmed through exploratory and production well-drilling and a commercial production well with generation capacity of 11MW has been drilled.

Despite efforts to implement commitments under the Multilateral Environmental Agreements, several barriers to progress in achieving mitigation targets of Dominicas NDC have been identified. These include, inter alia, natural hazards, financing, technology transfer and capacity development. Dominica experienced two extreme hydrometeorological events: Tropical Storm Erika in 2015 and Hurricane Maria in 2017, which resulted in damage and losses of ~90% and ~226% of GDP respectively. These events erased all traces of progress made towards the achievement of the SDGs and the Agreement but also highlighted gaps in the effectiveness of Disaster Risk Reduction measures. Lessons learnt from these experiences resulted in the development of a National Climate Change Policy and Action Plan (NCCPAP), which updates elements of the National Climate Change Adaptation Policy (2002) and the LCCRDS (2012- 2020). Subsequent to finalisation through public consultation, it is expected that the NCCPAP will be approved by Cabinet and will constitute Dominicas National Adaptation Plan (NAP).

Emphasising that climate change resilience is no longer optional, these two experiences only fuelled the determination to become the first climate resilient nation in the world.

In the Land-Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) sector, which continues to be vulnerable to natural hazards, the devastation caused by Hurricane Erika in 2015 and Maria in 2017 has resulted in destruction of a major sink and unintentional release of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, which is a major setback with respect to carbon sequestration goals. The level of forest decline that has occurred as a result, has not only made the likelihood of attaining the goal unattainable but has resulted in increased emissions due to the change in the land cover. This emphasizes the importance of establishing synergies and co-benefits between climate change adaptation and mitigation. Refer to Boxes 5 and 6 for further information on this sector and Boxes 7 to 9 for further mitigation initiatives being undertaken. Specific barriers within the Energy sector and capacity gaps required for NDC implementation are outline in tables 5 and 6 below.

With regards to the development of Dominicas geothermal resources, Hurricane Maria introduced significant set-backs to the project timeline, delaying its completion from 2025 to 2027. Financial challenges include: (i) high cost of insurance for such a large infrastructural project; (ii) availability of insurance for associated electricity transmission network; (iii) high mobilisation cost for specialist equipment and supplies; (iv) unfamiliarity of some lenders with Dominica and its risk profile; and (v) the insurance market has tightened in the Caribbean region due to recent losses from hurricane activity. Technical challenges include: (i) terrain constraints and mitigation costs, including  (a) transportation of drilling rig and large power plant components to the project site require improvement of the road network and constraints on technical design; and (b) relatively high civil works costs; (ii) lack of economies of scale  limited base (relatively small power plant) for spreading operation and maintenance costs; and (iii) the need to upgrade the electricity transmission infrastructure.

The capacity of forests to act as both a large sink and source, which can be abruptly reversed, coupled to the lengthy time-scale of forestation and the short time-scale on which hazards occur, makes attainment of sustainable forest management a seemingly elusive target due to the inherent dynamicity of the elements involved. Dominicas impressive forest resources have been acclaimed by various natural environment researchers, as one of the best remaining tropical rainforests in the Eastern Caribbean. More than half of the land area is designated as forest, of which ~20% is protected by the Forest Act of 1958 and the National Parks and Protected Areas Act, 1975, with major positive implications for carbon sequestration, eco-tourism and development of a thriving green economy. Hydrometeorological events which are projected to increase in magnitude and frequency due to climate change, continue to present a significant challenge to the efficient management of this important resource. Winds and intense rainfall associated with recent hurricane activity (Erika and Maria), produced widespread damage to the forest reserves. This not only resulted in the loss of valuable biodiversity and ecosystem resources but also the unintentional release of emissions into the atmosphere. In the global context, until ~2005 Dominicas greenhouse gas emissions were nil, due to the small size of the economy and population, combined with the ability of the large expanse of forested areas to sequester CO2 at levels that exceeded national greenhouse gas emissions from anthropogenic activities. The Bali Action Plan adopted in COP13, proposed for forests in developing countries to be considered as a key tool in climate change mitigation. The Warsaw Framework for REDD+ adopted in COP19 guides activities within the forestry sector to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, as well as the sustainable management of forests and the conservation and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries.

Reforestation of priority areas in the forests which were impacted by storms, particularly Hurricane Maria using Forest Enrichment Planting of natural forests and with agro-forestry/silvopastoral systems mainly on degraded lands and adjacent agricultural farms, will not only aid in maintaining soil stability and fertility and enhancing other aspects of the forest ecosystem and biodiversity; but also opens the opportunity for increased community-tourism interaction in the form of farm-tours, increase in agriculture produce for the local, regional and international markets, large number and variety of fruits for agro-processing, and provision of work for community members through jobs created from the reforestation initiatives. Dominica as a small island state understands that its best opportunities are in the conservation of its forests, as it has actually done so far, and it is where it has its best opportunities to enhance socio-economic development, while making significant contributions in the field of climate change mitigation. Forests are important to both adaptation and mitigation so it is important to assess linkages between these strategies and identify opportunities to enhance the outcomes of both. The combined effect of synergies between adaptation and mitigation is greater than the combined effects if implemented separately. Adaptation and mitigation synergies can advance sustainable development, as they can effectively reduce the vulnerability of natural ecosystems and socio-economic systems; as well as maximise investment flows and contribute to enhancement of institutional capacity to manage climate change risks. While reforestation and protection will increase carbon sequestration, adaptive management of protected areas also leads to biodiversity conservation and reduced vulnerability to climate change.

The REDD+ framework aims to cut emissions by providing financial incentives, backed by international funding, to reduce deforestation and forest degradation, promote forest conservation and sustainable management and enhance forest carbon stocks in developing countries. For Dominica, conservation, sustainable forest management and enhancement of carbon stocks are the key elements of the national REDD+ strategy. The National Land-Use policy and the National Forest policy have both been developed in alignment with the overall objectives of REDD+. The following elements will be developed under REDD+:

National Strategy or Action Plan  National forest reference emission level and/or forest reference level  Robust and transparent national forest monitoring system  System for providing information on safeguards The GIEP will promote achievement of the following Sustainable Development Goals:

The scope of works under LCTD include:  Development of an excel-based transport emissions model to capture energy usage, GHG and other pollutant emissions for roads and vessels, as well as the relative contributions from different vehicle categories.

Development of policy instruments and business models to incentivize low-carbon transportation options. This also includes the formulation of a low-carbon transportation and EV roadmap Poor waste management, including inappropriate storage, handling and disposal, plays a major role in the generation of marine litter. The Kalinago Territory, located on the east coast of Dominica, has a network of rivers, ravines and gullies which run directly into the Atlantic Ocean. These waterways act as a direct link for the transmission of illegal dumping and litter into the ocean. The method of waste collection within the territory is that of curb side, where bagged refuse is placed out for collection and ravaged by stray animals, dogs and vagrants, which lead to widespread littering within the territory and ultimately marine pollution. Both curbside waste collection arrangements and available storage for household waste are inadequate. These conditions are exacerbated by the absence of mechanisms for source separation, especially for recyclable waste and the diminishing lifespan of the landfill due to the volume of daily household garbage generated. The immediate beneficiary of this project is the Kalinago community. Successful implementation will provide DSWMC and other governmental agencies with a replicable and scalable model which can be replicated and upscaled across the Commonwealth, as well as contributions to marine health.

Project Activities o Public awareness and sensitisation o Conduct a situational analysis and needs assessment o Procurement of waste receptacles to facilitate waste separation at the household level o Establishment of composting facility/facilities o Establish monitoring and evaluation of the waste This updated NDC was guided by the most important identified and quantified benchmarks (consistent with global energy economic models26), for climate action to be taken by 2020-2025, associated with limiting global warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels by 2030. These benchmarks are as follows:

Sustain the current growth rate of renewables and other zero and low-carbon power generation until  No new coal power plants, reduce emissions from existing coal fleet by 30% by 2025  All new installations in emissions-intensive sectors low-carbon after 2020, maximize material  Reduce emissions from forestry and other land use to 95% below 2010 levels by 2030, stop net  Keep agriculture emissions at or below current levels, establish and disseminate regional best In order to achieve the total greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets in the time frame outlined above, the following sections identify sectoral measures which will be implemented to promote low-carbon, climate-resilient development conditional upon timely receipt of climate change financing. Table 12 details the ongoing and planned mitigation projects contingent upon climate finance. Table 13 details the information required to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding of Dominicas NDC.

Human activities can influence terrestrial sinks through land use, land use change and forestry.

The role of LULUCF activities in both climate change mitigation and adaptation has long been recognized. Sustainable management of activities in the LULUCF sector can contribute to mitigation through enhanced GHG removals from the atmosphere, reduction in GHG emissions through a reduced loss of carbon stocks, as well as adaptation co-benefits. The following sections describe targets and activities under the REDD+ Strategy and Land Degradation 26 Kuramochi et al. 2017 Ten key short-term sectoral benchmarks to limit warming to 1.5C Neutrality-Target Setting Programme (LDN-TSP), which represent mitigation efforts within the LULUCF sector.

Deforestation and forest degradation accounts for approximately 15% of global greenhouse gas emissions. The forest sector accounts for such a large share of emissions that it is essential to the achievement of the 1.5C or 2C limit to atmospheric warming. The Paris Agreement delivered a strong message that REDD+ forms a critical and prominent component of the global goal of net-zero emissions by the end of the 21st century. The Warsaw Framework for REDD+ adopted at COP 19, guides activities in the forest sector which reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, as well as the sustainable management of forests and the conservation and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries. National REDD+ strategies define, inter alia, direct and indirect drivers of deforestation, baselines and forest monitoring systems, reference emissions levels, social and environmental safeguards. Dominica has traditionally been considered as a rainforest nation and a carbon sink up until 2017 following the passage of hurricane Maria, which resulted in the loss of ~85% to 95% forest (depending on the location and forest type) and ~100% grassland and crop cover.

Based on the most recent land use and land use change assessment (2020) done by the Forestry, Wildlife and Parks Division, Dominica now has ~57.664 ha of remaining forest, mostly montane rainforest (~28.271 ha) followed by semi-evergreen forest (~10.234 ha) and coastal forest (~12.150 ha). The TNC submitted in 2020 which covered the period 2005 to 2017, included a GHG emissions inventory for LULUCF. However, prior to this, the last forest inventory was performed in 1987. As a result of the outdated dataset, the GHG inventory used was based on default values from the FAO Global Forest Resource Assessment data (FAO STAT). For the Emission Factors, Dominica fell into the category of having little or no country specific data available and thus Tier 1 was followed, using 2006 IPCC defaults values. It is important to note that the LULUCF sector was not included in the overall national target for the following reasons.

Firstly, the LULUCF sector is particularly vulnerable to natural hazards and therefore there is a high level of uncertainty in future forest cover. Additionally, this sector has the potential to be included in future carbon trading initiatives (based on rate of recovery) and therefore the Government of Dominica has taken the decision for it to not be included in the overall 2030 target, to ensure environmental integrity. As a result, the forestry targets identified under the LULUCF sector are conditional targets. Refer to Box 6 for further details on the REDD+ initiative.

Definitions for the assessment of the Forest Reference Level (FRL) required defining key REDD+ terminologies within the Dominican national context. The definitions for forest and the three (3) REDD+ activities considered are:

Defined as forest lands with a canopy cover equal or higher than 60%, with a minimum area extension of 1 ha and woody vegetation of minimum 3m height or higher, including temporary unstocked areas with the potential to reach the forest definition.

Defined as the areas of forest lands remaining forest lands under the Protected Areas System.

Conservation also includes, as stated in the National Land Use Policy and Plan, any areas identified as sensitive zones for natural resources management that are considered as "specially conserved areas". The priority of the system of protected areas is to effectively manage forests to conserve the natural biodiversity and function, and contributes to the sustainable socio- economic development, resilience and well-being of all citizens and users27. However, since hurricane Maria in 2017, these areas were significantly affected and now these are prioritized for natural regeneration.

Defined as the areas of forest lands remaining forest lands under management strategies, within the Protected Areas System, in particular in the two forest reserves (Central Forest Reserve and Northern Forest Reserve). Since hurricane Maria in 2017, these areas are prioritized for restoration, rehabilitation, and reforestation activities. Sustainable management of forest also refers to restoration, rehabilitation, and reforestation activities on farmlands and unallocated state lands28.

Defined as croplands, grasslands, wetlands, settlements and other lands converted to forest lands, as well as lands utilizing agroforestry practices that enhance forest carbon pools. 27 Dominica Protected Areas System Plan Report 28 These are state lands where no specific land use has been assigned Defined as forest lands converted to other lands (croplands, grasslands, wetlands, settlements, and other lands) and forest degradation, defined as forest land and remaining forest land affected by human disturbances (logging and fires) and natural disturbances (hurricanes). These were accounted for and reported for the years 2000 to 2017. The reason for excluding emissions reductions due to deforestation and forest degradation under REDD+ activities, is because in 2017 Dominica lost about 90% of their forest cover in forest lands29, due to hurricane Maria and the remaining 10% was still affected with mainly the understory being left behind. Therefore, currently Dominicas efforts are mainly focused on restoring the forest lands.

The Forestry, Wildlife and Parks Division has taken the initiative to lead and develop a national LULUCF GHG inventory, which includes GHG emissions and removals for all IPCC categories and sub-categories at the national level. The total land area is 750 km2 (75,000 ha). The country was divided into ten parishes and a systematic sampling grid of 1605 plots located 700m distance apart was used to allow national coverage of the island for the analysis.

For the development of the inventory, land remaining in the same category and conversions to other land uses, considering all lands as managed were included. This includes the pools above- ground biomass, below-ground biomass, dead wood and soil organic carbon. Harvested wood products were excluded due to lack of available information. Above-ground biomass was obtained from the National Forest Inventory from Saint Lucia (2009), as both islands share the same forest types and no recent forest inventory has taken place in Dominica. Below-ground biomass and dead organic matter were obtained from default values of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. Soil organic carbon was obtained from the FAO Global Soil Organic Carbon Map-GSOC map, from FAO (2019). NDC projections for the 2020 to 2030 period include the carbon pools: above-ground biomass, below-ground biomass, dead organic matter, and soil organic carbon. Carbon-dioxide, methane and nitrous- oxide emissions from biomass burning in forest land categories are included. Emissions in carbon-dioxide equivalents (CO2e) are reported using the 100-year global warming potentials (GWPs) contained in IPCCs Second Assessment Report (AR 2).

Activity Data (AD) was obtained from land-use and land-use change assessments, which were land-use was determined for each year of the time series 2000 to 2017, derived using the FAO Collect Earth tool. Emission Factors (EFs) were obtained from regional research, scientific literature and default values of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines and 2019 Refinements to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. For the development of the FRL, Dominica selected a Land Based Approach, which means that the REDD+ activities were assessed altogether, and therefore, no specific FRLs were developed by activity, to ensure environmental integrity. Therefore, REDD+ results will be evaluated as an integral outcome of national activities. The GHG Inventory was developed using the Foundational Platform calculation tool developed by the Coalition for Rainforest Nations. This tool allows extraction of the forest-related information from the GHG inventory to construct the FRL and update the NDC projections, using the same data, methods, assumptions and projections, which ensures full consistency among the reports.

The case of Dominica is unique. After Hurricane Maria in 2017, the land use assessment indicated that depending on the location and forest type, about 85% to 95% of the forest was lost. Therefore, despite a historical annual analysis of GHG emissions and removals was developed, it cannot be used as benchmark. This means, that from an estimated 6.3 million tC of stock in the forest previous to the hurricane, it went down to approximated 600,000 tC of stock (figure 4). As a result, all conditions prior to 2017 no longer applied and from 2018, forest lands presented new conditions due to the loss of the majority of the forest cover. Dominica acknowledges the importance of building the reference level based on the post-hurricane conditions in 2018, particularly, considering the remaining forest cover area, which was about 15% to 25% compared to 2017 before the hurricane.

Historical forest-related GHG emissions and removals average 1,103,640 tCO2e from 2001 to 2017 (refer to table 8). However, this average does not represent future projected emissions and removals dynamics for Dominica, as prior to the hurricane, Dominica was a net sink with an average of -90,940.4 tCO2e removals (averaging over the period 2001-2016). Due to the passage of hurricane Maria in 2017, where emissions were approximated 20 million tCO2e, Dominica shifted from a sink to a source with more emissions than removals. In addition, as these emissions and removals were based on a forest that no longer exists and the post- hurricane conditions are now different, the historical average of emissions cannot be used to represent the projected future emissions or removals. After the hurricane, some forest areas started to regenerate naturally, in other forest areas, restoration, rehabilitation and reforestation projects have been necessary, for which the Government has drafted multiple projects to support and enhance the forest recovery.

As a result, the selected baseline considers the projected C removals for the period 2020-2025 only due to post-disturbance forest regrowth, as natural regeneration started in 2018, along with the expected C removals of lands converted to forest lands, using the historical average, calculated as -648,028 tCO2e/yr. It is assumed that the forests will undergo a continuous recovery until 2025 with no further disturbances. From the period 2025-2030, it is assumed that some forests would reach the pre-hurricane C stocks and that the BAU scenario calculated for the period 2000-2017 for deforestation might be applicable once the forests have recovered.

Thus, the removals will be lower and there will be more emissions related to deforestation calculated as -621,369 tCO2e/yr (refer to table 9). Therefore, Dominica will use the post- hurricane C stock of 606,778 tC as benchmark for assessing the countrys performance in implementing the REDD+ activities referred to in decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 70.

Table 8: Forest related net balance of GHG emissions and removals 2001-2017 (tCO ) Figure 4: Historical C Stocks before Hurricane Maria (2017) and Projected C Stocks recovery from 2018 to 2030 (tC) The Government of Dominica has launched a Land Degradation Neutrality-Target Setting Programme (LDN-TSP) in 2017, in support of the three indicators of SDG target 15.3: land cover, land productivity and soil organic carbon stocks, which correspond to the progress indicators adopted by the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD). Using the LDN scientific conceptual framework, analytical tools and methodological guidance developed by the UNCCD to support this process and building upon the LDN baseline, the country identified and specified significant relevant LDN targets and possible associated measures to address land degradation processes in Dominica. A proposal was developed which defines national targets, as well as sub-targets. These targets contribute to all three NDC components: mitigation, adaptation and resilience.

The national targets are outlined as follows:

The sub-targets are outlined as follows:

- LDN is achieved in Saint Andrew and Saint David parishes (as areas where human activities (agriculture-based) exacerbated vulnerability to land degradation) in the country by 2030, - Improve 20% productivity and Soil Organic Carbon (SOC) stocks in cropland and grasslands - Rehabilitate 75% of the degraded land in Saint Andrew and an additional 100 km2 in other parts of the country through the introduction of sustainable crop production by 2030 (based - Promotion of sustainable land management practices to improve productivity of the land through the restoration of 25% of degraded areas with 100 km2 of sustainable croplands and agroforestry (based on results of LPD degraded areas over land cover transitions) - Incorporate LDN as an innovative land-use planning principle in Dominica (through a possible amendment of the National Land Use Plan and/or its incorporation in the planning - Strengthen the monitoring and enforcement regime of the Physical Planning Act through As one of the few nations that can be considered carbon-neutral in light of the nations limited use of fossil fuels (~28% from renewable sources) and a significant system of protected carbon sinks, Dominica continues to enhance its green energy transformation. Dominicas LCCRDS not only serves as the programmatic nexus for capturing conventional and innovative sources of sustainable development and climate financing but will also facilitate Dominicas transformation to a climate-resilient economy, while at the same time implementing, monitoring and building upon existing low-emission, climate-resilient development projects and programmes. The Government has declared a national target of 100% renewable energy by 2030 and 98.6% GHG emissions reduction in Energy Industries, as an indication of its level of ambition to accelerate the transition from a dependence on imported fossil fuels to a more sustainable balance of national renewable energy resources. Refer to table 10 for a list of mitigation measures within the energy sector. Energy sources will include renewables: geothermal (main), solar, wind and hydro-power, as well as synthetic fuels: biofuels, hydrogen and ammonia. Increasing energy efficiency will further reduce energy costs and increase environmental sustainability. Dominica has also engaged the GCF for an Economic Feasibility Analysis of a Green Industrial Eco Park to advance these plans. Refer to Box 7 for further details.

In addition, it is expected that the commercial development and continued harnessing of Dominicas geothermal resources will, from 2027, enable the country to export significant amounts of renewable energy (estimated to exceed 200Gg annually) to the nearby French Territories of Martinique and Guadeloupe, thereby further contributing to regional efforts and the global stocktake under Article 14 of the agreement. The Geothermal Resources Development Bill, which is in the final stages of review, makes provisions for the regulation of geothermal resources with the objective of ensuring the sustainable development of the resource and ensuring its allocation to the uses which are most economically beneficial to Dominica.

Geothermal resource development has advanced considerably through the GCF-approved Sustainable Energy Facility for the Eastern Caribbean regional programme, which aims to address financial, technical and institutional barriers to development. The 10MW power plant will be based on binary cycle geothermal power plant technology, which is a closed-loop system with near-zero emissions. A further 5MW is being planned for the domestic market, approximately four years following the commissioning of the first 10MW. With the exception of an expanding hydro-power industry and political preference for geothermal energy development, growth and diversification of Dominicas renewable energy and energy efficiency initiatives have been limited mainly by regulatory barriers to adoption and marginal energy efficiency measures.

However, Dominica has implemented several energy efficiency and renewable energy projects between 2007 and 2017.

Energy Generation Use of renewable energy sources and energy saving measures (refer to previous section) - Building Roofs and Walls: implementation of energy efficiency measures; natural lighting; design guidelines for new and retrofit buildings; green roofs - H2O heating: solar water heaters - Lighting: Use of LED lamps, photo cells, motion sensors, Food preparation: Encouraged transition to RE use, energy conservation practices through public awareness campaigns Attire: Less formal/casual attire more suited to a tropical climate to reduce the need for air-conditioning units to be encouraged Playground Lighting: LED fixtures to replace halogen or metal halide versions destroyed by Hurricane Maria; solar PV Solid Waste: Significant improvements in waste management, particularly backyard and municipal composting, separation at source, and reduction and recycling of plastics will sharply reduce the amount of waste transported to the landfill.

Transport: Aggressive switch to green transportation, focusing on electric vehicles and possibly fuel cell vehicles. A few rapid charging stations can be setup around the island powered by hydro or wind to provide the daily charging requirement, with solar PV reserved for top-up at bus stops and parking garages.

Walking/Cycling: A combination of improved public transportation, enhanced pedestrian walkways, routes and sidewalks, and public awareness on the cross benefit of exercise.

For the agriculture sector, the Government of Dominica has set a target of 50% emissions reduction by 2030. Several areas have been identified where greenhouse gas mitigation measures can be achieved within this sector. Transformational approaches will include:

Dominica has set a target of 50% increase in agroforestry farmers by 2030. Agroforestry systems offer opportunities for synergies between climate change mitigation and adaptation. Agroforestry will contribute to mitigation efforts through increased: (i) carbon sequestration  increased carbon storage in biomass above and below ground, as well as soil organic carbon;

A target of 20% emissions reduction by 2030 has been set for the transport sector. This emissions reduction target will be achieved mainly through initiatives for the road and marine sub-sectors. Globally, the transport sector contributes approximately a quarter of all energy- related GHG emissions. In Dominica, the transport sector accounted for the largest amount of CO2 emissions between 2006 and 2016, with a small decline in 2017. Dominica has engaged in a GCF-funded project: Low-Carbon Transport Dominica, the objective of which is to identify a framework for Dominicas transition to a sustainable low-carbon transportation network. Refer to Box 8 for further details on the Low Carbon Transport Dominica initiative and table 11 for targets under this project.

As with most developing countries, road transport consumes an increasing amount of petroleum, particularly private cars and buses. To mitigate this trend, two priority steps have been taken: (i) the introduction of a policy mandating that all government vehicles, at their time of replacement, be replaced with hybrid vehicles; (ii) the introduction of market-based mechanisms to motivate the private sector to purchase hybrid vehicles when replacing current vehicles. It is anticipated that these actions will continue beyond 2030 to bring about an estimated emissions reduction of ~12Gg.

Dominica has set a target for 100% emissions reduction in the shipping sub-sector by 2030.

Achievement of this will largely be based on the development of synthetic fuels. Refer to Box 7 for further details. Although Dominica does not own or operate any airline and has little influence on the fuel used by airplanes, Dominica Air and Sea Port Authority (DASPA) has embarked on a program to augment airport and sea port facilities with off-grid electricity using solar PV and possible hydro.

Globally, waste represents the fourth largest source sector of emissions, accounting for ~3.2% of total GHG emissions. For Dominica, there has been little progress towards the emissions reduction target of 78.6% and emission increases in this sector have been largely attributed to the passage of hurricanes Erika and Maria, which further exacerbated efforts. The Government of Dominica recognises the important role of sustainable waste management in the circular economy. To achieve the communicated emissions reduction target of 78.6% for the waste sector, Dominica is committed to the transition to sustainable waste management and a circular economy by 2030. Refer to Box 9 for pilot project with the Kalinago Community.

To support the transition, the following needs have been identified:

Capacity-building for waste management technologies, data collection and inventory Designing a landfill to capture methane, such as a bioreactor landfill or use of waste-to-energy conversion technologies are also feasible options to address environmental, economical and societal sustainability. In addition to environmental and public health benefits, this also provides socio-economic benefits such as income creation. Dominicas existing landfill is a modern, engineered landfill with a liner, leachate collection and capping. Methane collection vents were installed from the start and have been venting the methane produced from the organic waste decomposition process since 2005. This project will reduce most of the methane from the landfill by: (i) diverting organics from the waste stream that is currently deposited in the landfill; and (ii) suitably preparing the landfill and installing a flaring system. In addition, the present landfill needs to be expanded if it is expected to receive more waste within the next 4 years. The previous dumpsites that were closed also need to be considered for methane collection and flaring systems. In order to further reduce methane emissions and reach NDC targets, the present volume of organic waste brought into the landfill (~40% of all waste) needs to be reduced. This can be done by implementing a fully integrated solid waste management program that involves the following:

Curb-side pickup of organic waste (separation from source with revised collection system)  Curb-side pickup of individual types of non-organic waste (separation from source with  Material recovery facilities and composting facilities in selected regions on the island Upgrading only the landfill will not solve the problem of methane gas emissions unless what is actually brought to the landfill is managed systematically. In order to achieve this goal, upgrades and equipment will be required with forecasted emission reductions estimated to be in excess of ~11Gg.

Table (11): Transport sector targets identified for implementation of the Low-Carbon Transport Dominica Project Developed or enhanced strategic frameworks to address policy gaps, improve sectoral expertise, and enhance enabling environments for GCF programming in low-emission investment Development of transport emission inventories and models to facilitate reliable and detailed emission projections which can be used to assess and monitor quantitatively low-carbon transport options Development of low-carbon transport options to produce a low-carbon transport roadmap, which serves as a policy guidance document and shall enable Dominica to achieve the NDC GHG transport target A cabinet-endorsed, low-carbon transport roadmap, which includes a detailed assessment of at least two low carbon transport measures Submission of a concept note to the GCF as a step towards implementation of the low- carbon roadmap - Assess various available climate finance options for low-carbon transport available to Dominica, including pros and cons of each option. Options include climate technology funds, GCF, emission trading under Article. 6, bilateral donors etc.

- Develop a concept note to the GCF for low-carbon transport in Dominica, based on financing options selected for investment by private sector interests - Consultant to engage local stakeholders and potential investors further to advancing the other options developed for different transport modality. To include elaboration of roadmap previously developed Increased awareness and knowledge on low carbon transport options of private and government stakeholders Inform local stakeholders on requirements (infrastructure, human resource, finance, training, economy of scale, and affordability for end users) for the establishment of low-carbon transport modalities Table (12): Summary of Climate Change Mitigation Activities contingent on financial support30 Geothermal power plant design and construction, Capacity development: energy assessment, development and technologies Establishment of soft financing for community and small-scale private geothermal plants Establishment of soft financing for community and small-scale private solar power conversions Design and construction of pilot solar power facility and connection to electrical grid Establishment of soft financing for community and small-scale private wind power conversions Design and construction of wind farm on East coast and connection to electrical grid Establishment of soft financing for community and small-scale hydro-power conversions Development of inventory of hydro-energy potential and assessment of commercial viability of technologies Establishment of soft financing for community and small-scale hydro-power conversions Capacity development: first- and second-generation biofuels technologies, processes and costs Establishment of legislative support to facilitate introduction of biofuels for vehicles and generators Upgrading of roads to improve connectivity, reduce travel time and vehicle emissions Capacity development: forest/agriculture inventory process including computerised forest monitoring technologies; viability assessment for protection of additional forest/agriculture land and marine areas Assessment of carbon uptake by forest/agriculture lands and marine areas; protection of new and additional carbon sinks Establishment of soft financing for energy conservation and conversion to renewable energy technology Conversion of public buildings/infrastructure to low-carbon technologies in Portsmouth Establishment of vehicle upgrade and maintenance programs to phase in the conversion to fuel efficient and low-carbon vehicles (solar powered, electrical, biofuel powered, hydrogen powered) Design and legal establishment of Climate Change Trust Fund for conversion to low-carbon technologies Assessment of viable options for conversion to low-carbon technologies using market-based instruments (carbon levies) Table (13): Information necessary to facilitate Clarity, Transparency and Understanding of Dominicas NDC 1 Quantifiable information on the reference point (including, as appropriate, a base year) (a) Reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s);

Total GHG emissions reduction baseline: 2014 Forest carbon sequestration baseline: 2018 (b) Quantifiable information on the reference indicators, their values in the reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s), and, as applicable, in the target year;

Total GHG emissions estimates for the 2014 reference year has been updated to ~219.71Gg, as reported in the updated National GHG Inventory of the TNC. Sectoral emissions estimates (Gg) for the reference year are as follows: Energy (~167.24); Industrial Processes (~0.05); Agriculture (~22.17) and Waste (~30.25). These values may be further adjusted in the future in accordance with section 1(f) below.

(c) For strategies, plans and actions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement or policies and measure as components of nationally determined contributions where paragraph 1(b) above is not applicable, Parties to provide other relevant information;

(d) Target relative to the reference indicator, expressed numerically, for example in percentage or amount of reduction;

Overall Emissions Reduction Targets  39% by 2025  45% by 2030; Sectoral Emissions Reduction Targets  Energy Industries: 98.6%  Agriculture: 50% (e) Information on sources of data used in quantifying the reference point(s); Quantification of reference points are based on the National GHG Inventory reported in Dominicas Third National Communication. This was compiled using the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories.

(f) Information on the circumstances under which the Party may update the values of the reference indicators.

Consistent with Decision 18/CMA1 paragraph 28, the GHG inventory will be periodically reviewed by technical experts. Values may therefore be updated or recalculated due to the inclusion of new sectors, methodological improvements or changes in the reporting format. Information on any updates will be reported in the Biennial Transparency Report.

(a) Time frame and/or period for implementation, including start and end date, consistent with any further relevant decision adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA);

(b) Sectors, gases, categories and pools covered by the nationally determined contribution, including, as applicable, consistent with Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) guidelines;

(c) How the Party has taken into consideration paragraph 31(c) and (d) of decision 1/CP.21; (indicating how the Party is striving to include all sources and sinks, and why any categories are excluded);

Dominica continues to strive for the inclusion (and protection where applicable) of all sources and sinks in its NDC, as evidenced by the inclusion of both direct and indirect GHGs. However, this is conditional upon the receipt of timely access to international finance, technology development and transfer, as well as capacity building support for implementation of priority mitigation measures.

(d) Mitigation co-benefits resulting from Parties adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans, including description of specific projects, measures and initiatives of Parties adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans.

The country has adopted an integrated approach to adaptation and mitigation to achieve climate resilience. There is considerable potential for mitigation co-benefits particularly in the forestry and agriculture sector (refer to Box 5), supported by relevant regulatory and institutional frameworks for achievement, which have been detailed in the accompanying text.

(a) Information on the planning processes that the Party undertook to prepare its nationally determined contribution and, if available, on the Partys implementation plans, including, as appropriate:

(i) Domestic institutional arrangements, public participation and engagement with local communities and indigenous peoples, in a gender-responsive manner;

This was led by the National focal point in the Ministry of Environment, Rural Modernization and Kalinago Upliftment, in conjunction with the Climate Resilience Execution Agency for Dominica, with technical support from UNDP. Prior to the NDC revision, target progress and stakeholder capacity development assessments were performed. This involved an assessment of the institutional, regulatory and systematic frameworks developed in support of climate action and NDC implementation, progress in NDC implementation, as well as capacity gaps and training requirements. Further details in section 4.1.

Domestic Institutional Arrangements: Several cross-sectoral institutions have been established to ensure mainstreaming and alignment with national processes and plans; and to coordinate and implement initiatives in relation to climate change adaptation, mitigation and resilience.

Stakeholder Engagement: Recognising the importance of increased national awareness and the Paris negotiations. It also provided an opportunity for stakeholders to engage in the work done on enhancing NDCs, and provide their inputs on what they think should be put forward as Dominicas contribution. It will further enhance the culture of a sustainable national dialogue and provides a platform for all stakeholders who have an interest in climate change negotiations and also increases acceptance of implementation measures.

Community and Indigenous Persons, Gender Considerations: The Country Assessment report for the Commonwealth of Dominica - Enhancing Gender Visibility in Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change in the Caribbean, provides insights on the extent to which mechanisms for climate change risk management effectively incorporates gender considerations. The study highlights key measures which are required to achieve gender equality in climate change risk management in Dominica which is fundamental for the survival and well-being of the countrys population. It also supports the development of better public policies for climate change risk management that can help key stakeholders to anticipate and prevent the differentiated impact of hazards on each woman and other vulnerable segments of society. Dominicas Government acknowledged its responsibilities to the Kalinago peoples and is committed to working and supporting them in the realization of self- determination and other human rights as outlined in the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Specific strategies have been proposed in the NRDS, which fall under capacity building, promotion of social justice and preservation of culture. Priority climate change adaptation measures have been identified in collaboration with the Kalinago Group to reduce threats to the people, culture, livelihoods and existence of the Kalinago Territory.

(ii) Contextual matters, including, inter alia, as appropriate:

Population: Dominica was originally populated by Amerindian peoples, known as Kalinago or Caribs. This is the only island in the Caribbean that still possesses distinct communities of these indigenous people. Population estimates for 2011 indicate that Dominica had a population of approximately 71,293 persons (a decline from 74,750 in 1994), including two thousand Kalinago, the remaining survivors of the first inhabitants of the island. The total population comprises 36,411 males and 34,882 females. The population is mostly of African and mixed African/European descent, with European, Syrian and Indigenous minorities. Dominica ranks as one of the top five countries in the world with the highest net emigration, with the size of the Dominican diaspora more than double the countrys existing population. After the devastation caused by Hurricane Maria in September 2017, an estimated 20,000 persons left Dominica to seek education and employment in neighbouring countries. Large expanses of mountainous topography have limited human settlements to narrow coastal areas particularly in the south and west with approximately 44,000 persons (62%) living along the coast prior to Hurricane Maria. There are two primary population clusters: Portsmouth and the capital city Roseau and its environs, which is the largest community with 14,847 persons, representing almost 21% of the total population. In 2017, 40% of the population resided in rural areas.

Climate: Dominicas climate is characterized as tropical maritime with characteristically warm temperatures and intense rainfall. The day-time average of 26-27C in coastal areas decreases to 19- 21 in mountainous areas. Whereas night-time temperatures averages 18-22C along the coast and 10-12C at higher elevations. Relative humidity is consistently high throughout the year, averaging ~ 85% in mountainous interior areas. Excessive heat and humidity are tempered to an extent by the steady flow of the north-east trade winds. Annually, the climate is distinguished only by rainfall amounts, with a dry season from December to May and a wet season from June to November. The average yearly rainfall ranges from ~1,900 mm for coast areas to ~5,000 mm for inland areas. Generally, rainfall is less on the islands western leeward coast which, due to the prevailing winds, is within the rain-shadow of the mountainous interior. The steep, mountainous terrain alters temperatures, winds and rainfall which results in a number of micro-climates. The rugged topography results in considerable amounts of orographic rainfall, making it the wettest island in the eastern Caribbean with annual rainfall totals exceeding 10,000 mm (400 inches) in some of the higher elevations and rendering the island susceptible to landslides particularly in mountainous areas. Dominicas position within the Atlantic hurricane belt combined with its climate, makes it vulnerable to hydrometeorological hazards.

Sustainable Development: Dominica has always been in a vulnerable position economically, socially, culturally, and environmentally. Although economic growth was slowed by a myriad of unfavourable development activities, particularly with respect to trade, there were underlying weaknesses in the economy such as a reliance on one or two sectors. This lack of diversity exacerbated vulnerability to economic shocks and poor fiscal management led to unsustainable debt levels. Dominica has prioritised sustainable development and achievement of the sustainable development goals (SDGs), as evidenced by the many projects in the pipeline to ensure these goals are met by 2030. Climate change poses unique threats to sustainable development, however, Dominicas Citizenship by Investment (CBI) Programme has been a crucial element in funding many of the projects that have put them well on track to attain the SDGs. Details of these projects can be found in Annex I. The Ministry of Planning and Economic Development has overall responsibility for national planning, coordination and monitoring of policies and plans in relation to the SDGs. In addition, an interim SDG Technical committee has been established and a national structure as the formalized oversight mechanism is in preparatory phase. In 2018, the National Resilience Development Strategy (NRDS) 2030 was approved by Dominicas government. This long-term national plan which considers the unique challenges faced by SIDS, is grounded in the SDGs and the national vision of becoming the First Climate Resilient Country in the world, and is shaped by three strategic elements: environmental protection, social development and economic development and transformation. All sector plans have been developed and well-aligned to the SDGs and the nations vision. The sector plans are medium- term (four-year) strategic plans which are further divided into yearly implementation plans. Furthermore, guidelines for the monitoring and reporting of projects which capture information that enhances the sustainability and resilience pursuits have been developed.

A draft framework was crafted for Primary and Secondary level education to facilitate integration of the SDGs into the school curriculum. The Central Statistics Office has adopted Caribbean specific SDGs, with the selection of specific indicators that are relevant to the region to be monitored. In addition, a database is in the process of development to register the indicators, their definition and rationales, responsible stakeholders, level of completion and reporting methods. Dominica vowed to become the worlds first climate resilient country through a comprehensive program to Build Back Better as championed by the Islands Prime Minister. A Climate Resilient Executive Agency, a Policy Advisory Board and a Public Private Sector Investment Committee were created to oversee the resilience building process and the new climate smart country branding. The cornerstone of the rebuilding process included several aspects as follows: Grant based reconstruction resources from a range of donors; insurance facilities and bilateral arrangements; debt reconstruction including debt forgiveness; strengthening of the citizen by investments programs; investment in climate resilient infrastructure; investment in critical social infrastructure; cost effective fiscal policies and reform; expenditure controls; controls on extending external debt; diaspora engagement; and establishing legal and regulatory frameworks to address the threats, causes and consequences of climate change.

Tracking and Monitoring The government realises that there are several benefits to accurate tracking and monitoring of progress. These include: more effective and efficient use of financial and other resources allocated to implementation of climate change measures; greater visibility and better coordination among donors and climate investors; ability to develop new green technologies and obtain important lessons learned to enhance economic development. Dominica intends to adopt one of the top actions for tracking the progress and evaluating climate change policies  Modalities, Procedures and Guidelines (MPGs) under the ETF, that has been adopted as part of the Katowice Climate Package. In addition, the country intends to develop several databases to facilitate accurate collection, tracking and monitoring of quantitative and qualitative targets/indicators across various sectors. GHG Projections Dominica has used global data in the preparation of its national GHG inventory, which limits its ability to develop robust national-level emission projections. In addition, technological capacity is lacking to perform future assessments. The country is in the initial stages of development of its national GHG inventory and intends to build capacity in this area to facilitate development of projections. Mitigation, Adaptation and Resilience Dominica has been exemplary in its development of institutional and regulatory frameworks, as evidenced by its many policies, plans, institutions and committees to support the transition to a green economy; while at the same time promoting measures for adaptation, climate resilience and sustainable development. Considerable progress has also been made in achieving coherence among global goals: Paris Agreement, Sustainable Development Goals and Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. Dominica has been very successful in in securing international climate finance from several major funding bodies to support and scale-up its climate action in both mitigation and adaptation components, including capacity development. Experiences and lessons learnt from NDC implementation, as well as pursuit of other global goals and agreements, combined with technological advancements and new financial partnerships led to the revision and updating of targets, to reflect new sub-sectors and enhanced ambition for pre-existing targets.

Agreement;

(c) How the Partys preparation of its nationally determined contribution has been informed by the outcomes of the global stocktake, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreement;

(d) Each Party with a nationally determined contribution under Article 4 of the Paris Agreement that consists of adaptation action and/or economic diversification plans resulting in mitigation co-benefits consistent with Article 4, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement to submit information on:

(i) How the economic and social consequences of response measures have been considered in developing the nationally determined contribution;

Dominica, recognising that in managing the impacts of climate change, it may also be affected by the impact of response measures, and in its consideration of the economic and social consequences of response measures as part of the development of the updated NDC, has done the following: included the imperatives of a just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs in accordance with nationally defined development priorities; made all reasonable attempts to foster synergies and co-benefits between adaptation and mitigation measures; prioritised efforts at all levels from national to sub-national and cross-cutting (gender, vulnerable populations etc.) and has analysed the uneven distribution of impacts, risks and vulnerabilities across different groups of population.

(ii) Specific projects, measures and activities to be implemented to contribute to mitigation co-benefits, including information on adaption plans that also yield mitigation co-benefits, which may cover but are not limited to, key sectors, such as energy, resources water resources coastal resources, human settlements and urban planning, agriculture and forestry; and economic diversification actions, which may cover, but are not limited to, sectors such as manufacturing and industry, energy and mining, transport and communication, construction tourism, real estate, agriculture and fisheries.

Special Program on Adaptation to Climate Change (SPACC), GEF-funded Sustainable Land Management (SLM) project, Vulnerability Mapping and Climate-Proofing of National Parks Management Plans, Community-based vulnerability mapping. Low-Carbon Climate-Resilient Development Strategy, INC, SNC, PPCR. Establishment of a Climate Change, Environment and Natural Resource Management legislation to establish the legal and institutional framework to support the transitions to a climate resilient, low carbon development path.

5 Assumptions and methodological approaches, including those for estimating and accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and, as appropriate, removals (a) Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals corresponding to the Partys nationally determined contribution, consistent with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 31, and accounting guidance adopted by the CMA;

- GHG inventories were compiled using the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National GHG Inventories based on IPCCs Third Assessment Report (TAR) Global Warming Potentials (GWPs). Uncertainties in the inventory arise from both emission factors and activity data. Approved statistical adjustments were undertaken with activity data to facilitate accuracy and consistency in reporting. Since default emission factors were used, their uncertainties are those recommended in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National GHG Inventories. Refer to 3b for sectors and gases included in the GHG inventory and the emissions baseline estimate. - Uncertainties in the activity data were due mainly to the inconsistencies in the available datasets, either because records were not effectively maintained and/or not compiled at all. In such cases, statistical analysis was conducted. - Two methods were used to calculate CO2 emissions: the Reference Approach and the Sector Approach. - For non-CO2 emissions, data was obtained from the CSO, Government of the Commonwealth of Dominica and trade import data for bitumen, personal care products, solvents and refrigeration and air- conditioning products. Default IPCC emission factors based on import data were then used to estimate NMVOC emissions following the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. The 2006 IPCC Guidelines Tier 1 methodology was used to estimate the potential HFC emissions. The estimate was based on the number of different types of refrigeration and air-conditioning products and equipment. Data was obtained from the Customs and Excise Unit. - Data was available for 2014/2015/2017 from ECU (which manages an Ozone Depleting Substances Project) and extrapolated for the back years using import data for refrigeration and air conditioning units applying statistical adjustments for inconsistencies during some years. For fire protection, aerosols and other chemical use, import data was used with 2006 IPCC defaults factors to estimate the quantity of HFCs material in each product and potential losses. Data for the quantity of road surface area paved or the amount of asphalt produced were not available. Hence, it was assumed that all the bitumen imported was used for road paving and that paving material contained 10% bitumen. The default emission factor for NMVOC emission for road paving was used.

- Production data for brewery and alcoholic beverages products were obtained from the relevant companies, alcoholic production data was obtained from two main producers, and soap production from Dominica Coconut Products. Default emission factors offered under the IPCC workbooks were used in calculating the GHG emissions. Production data for bread and similar products were not available, therefore no emissions from bread making were estimated.

Non-CO2 emissions generated by the energy sector in Dominica include emissions of methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOC), and sulphur dioxide (SO2). The N2O, SO2 and HFC emissions are relatively small (less than 0.4 Gg) while the average annual CH4, and NMVOC emissions were 1.32 Gg and 0.45 Gg respectively.

Based on International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities (ISIC 3.1 Section D- ISIC), Code 154 (manufacture of other food products-bakery products) constitutes the largest component, Code 55 (manufacture of beverages and distilled spirits) and ISIC Code 242 (manufacture of other chemical products - paints and varnish) were the products mainly produced in Dominica. The facilities that are sources of Non-CO2 Emissions are bakeries, Dominica Brewery and Beverage Limited, paints, personal care products and asphalt paving which give rise to NMVOC emissions. HFCs are released from refrigeration and air conditioning, fire protection, aerosols, and other chemical use.

Emissions from solvent and product use were calculated in the 2005 inventory. For this inventory, estimations of NMVOC emissions were estimated for products such as paints, varnishes, thinners, enamels and household product use. Estimates of the emissions from solvent and other product use are based on the amounts of products used and the percentage of NMVOC or N2O that evaporates during use. Import data for paint products were obtained from the CSO and it was assumed that all imports were used in the same year. In addition, it was estimated that imported paints had the same solvent content limits as the US EPA solvent content limits. The emission factors represent the use of household products in the US and no data on the use of these products in Dominica (i.e., country- specific emission factors) were available. The emission factor was multiplied by the population in each year to give the NMVOC emissions from household product use in each year.

The IPCC methodology for estimating CH4 emissions from SWDS is based on the First Order Decay (FOD) method. This method assumes that the degradable organic component (degradable organic carbon) in waste decays slowly throughout a few decades, during which CH4 and CO2 are formed. If conditions are constant, the rate of CH4 production depends solely on the amount of carbon remaining in the waste.

Indirect N2O emissions from human sludge were estimated from the nitrogen content of human sludge which was based on the per capita protein consumption of an average person in Dominica and then by applying a default IPCC emission factor (kg N2O/kg human sludge N). A waste characterization study (DSWMC, 2006) conducted in 2002 provided country-specific estimates of the degradable organic carbon in waste. Data for waste received at the sanitary landfill during the months of 2012 were used to estimate the per capita waste generated. In addition, expert opinion from the landfill manager/s and it was estimated that the per capita waste generation in 2007 (21,000-25,000 kg annually) was the same in 2012- 2016. Population data obtained from the CSO and per capita solid waste disposal noted above were used to calculate total solid waste per year.

In 2000 there were a lot more solid waste disposal sites located all over the island as compared to the period 2006-2017. This explains the drop in CH4 emissions from the year 2000 and the revise 2006 IPCC guidelines accounts for some changes.

The IPCC Tier 1 approach was used to calculate methane emissions from enteric fermentation and manure management emissions using regional default IPCC emission factors and the country-specific populations for each category of livestock (data obtained from the Food and Agriculture Organization- FAO website). N2O emissions from soils, animal production and from the application of fertilizers are estimated based on the amounts of nitrogen input from synthetic fertilizers, animal waste, nitrogen fixing crops and crop residues. Direct and indirect N2O releases to the atmosphere were then estimated from these inputs using default IPCC emission factors. Animal population data from 2006- 2016 was obtained from FAO website, with 2017 estimated based on trends although the estimate for cattle appears high. The most recent agricultural census for Dominica was in 1995. Crop production data were obtained from FAO inclusive with some data from CSO. Annual import data from FAO and International Trade Center (Trade Maps) for synthetic fertilizer was used.

(b) Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for the implementation of policies and measures or strategies in the nationally determined contribution;

(c) If applicable, information on how the Party will take into account existing methods and guidance under the Convention to account for anthropogenic emissions and removals, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 14, of the Paris Agreement, as appropriate;

(d) IPCC methodologies and metrics used for estimating anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals;

(e) Sector-, category-or activity-specific assumptions, methodologies and approaches consistent with IPCC guidance, as appropriate, including, as applicable:

(i) Approach to addressing emissions and subsequent removals from natural disturbances on managed lands;

Any approach used will be consistent with IPCC 2006 guidelines and best practices. The approach is embedded in the principles of sustainable land management to include emphasis on: minimizing soil erosion and soil acidification in particular while at the same time placing greater emphasis on increasing soil organic matter, fostering soil nutrient balance and cycles and increasing soil biodiversity. See Box 5 for further information.

(ii) Approach used to account for emissions and removals from harvested wood products;

(iii) Approach used to address the effects of age-class structure in forests; NA (f) Other assumptions and methodological approaches used for understanding the nationally determined contribution and, if applicable, estimating corresponding emissions and removals, including:

(i) How the reference indicators, baseline(s) and/or reference level(s), including, where applicable, sector-, category-or activity-specific reference levels, are constructed, including, for example, key parameters, assumptions, definitions, methodologies, data sources and models used;

(ii) For Parties with nationally determined contributions that contain non- greenhouse-gas components, information on assumptions and methodological approaches used in relation to those components as applicable;

(iii) For climate forcers included in nationally determined contributions not covered by IPCC guidelines, information on how the climate forcers are estimated;

(g) The intention to use voluntary cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, if applicable;

Dominica has engaged in a bilateral agreement with Switzerland, enabling the island to sell its carbon credits in an emissions trading deal, with the aim of generating offsets in Switzerland that can be used to help meet its Nationally Determined Contributions and generate internationally transferred mitigation outcomes. Under the agreement, Switzerland will undertake a project to finance the electrification of the islands transport sector and geothermal energy which will count towards Switzerlands greenhouse gas reduction target. This will be done consistent with cooperative approaches outlined in Article 6.2 and Article 6.4, with constant project monitoring to ensure the specified criteria are met. In addition, the Government of Dominica intends to explore carbon-trading schemes under REDD+ for the Forestry sector when it becomes feasible.

6 How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances (a) How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances; expanse which was a key tool in climate change mitigation, and the current vulnerability of its forest reserves to hydrometeorological hazards, the country intends to engage in aggressive reforestation and protection activities. In order to ensure fair and equitable distribution of benefits to local communities, from the harnessing of renewable resources to facilitate the transition to a low- development path, the Government of Dominica will establish an appropriate royalty regime for the commercial exploitation of hydro and geothermal resources. To ensure fair and equitable compensation for self-generation owners, the Government of Dominica will promote the establishment of a net metering program. This will assist in ensuring fair and equitable payment for excess power delivered to the grid from self-generators. The sound and sustainable management of forests in Dominica will continue to ensure continued carbon sequestration, resulting in no net contribution to global GHG emissions.

(c) How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 3, of the Paris Agreement;

In light of national circumstances, this NDC submission is enhanced in all aspects of climate action relevant to developing countries/SIDS.

(d) How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement;

(e) How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement.

7 How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2 (a) How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2; Dominicas updated NDC, through its sectoral single and multi-year emissions reduction targets, geothermal energy resources export, forest carbon sequestration projections, as well as the use of ITMOs, contributes not only to national level but also regional and international level efforts for achievement of the ultimate goal of the Convention. This NDC, which is being implemented through sectoral approaches, is unique by its inclusion of climate action targets for three NDC pillars: mitigation, adaptation and resilience. In addition, the renewable energy development target will contribute to the global stocktake under Article 14. This ambitious level of climate action, backed by an NDC Implementation Plan will be dependent upon the timely receipt of international climate financing to ensure its success.

(b) How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards Article 2, paragraph 1(a), and Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Paris Agreement.

Further to 7(a) above, the mitigation targets have been guided by sectoral shifts and benchmarks associated with limiting global warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels by 2030 in specific sectors consistent with global economic modelling scenarios as outlined in Kuramochi et al. 2017.

For Dominica, the ultimate objective of adaptation action is the integration of climate change considerations into the planning, development and implementation of all activities at all levels.

The main aims are to:

Integrate climate change with development policies, plans and projects, as well as  Ensure that adaptive responses are consistent with national social, economic and  Take adaptive action where State property, resources and services are likely to be This is necessary to ensure that adaptation activities serve wider development goals and objectives of reducing vulnerability to existing climate stresses and of promoting sustainable development. Dominica is striving for multi-sectoral and multi-level adaptation across all segments of society, giving particular consideration to vulnerable groups - the poor, disabled, elderly and Kalinago community; as well as gender disparities. Recognising the threats posed by climate change, Dominica has over the last two decades, undertaken a number of initiatives to respond to this threat. The adaptation component has been revised to incorporate updated information on regional climate change projections and impacts on Caribbean SIDS. Climate considerations are now more explicitly incorporated to ensure alignment of the development pathway with climate action measures, to ensure climate-resilient and sustainable development.

The new approach for the climate change response is holistic and comprehensive, cross- sectoral and inclusive. This approach is grounded in the identification, selection, implementation and evaluation of strategies, programmes, projects and actions to reduce climate-related vulnerabilities in pursuit of Dominicas sustainable development goals. The status of ongoing and planned adaptation initiatives has also been updated, including financial requirements (refer to table 14). Dominica developed a National Climate Change Adaptation Policy, formulated with support under the Caribbean Planning for Adaptation to Climate Change (CPACC) Project, which was adopted by the Cabinet in 2002. In January 2005, the Phase II Enabling Activity, under the UNFCCC was completed, which involved capacity building for climate change. The country has undertaken a number of adaptation projects, including:

6.1 Adaptation Communication Article 7 of the Paris Agreement establishes the goal of climate change adaptation as a country- driven, gender-responsive, participatory and fully transparent approach, taking into consideration vulnerable groups, communities and ecosystems, and should be based on and guided by the best available science and, as appropriate, traditional knowledge, knowledge of indigenous peoples and local knowledge systems, with a view to integrating adaptation into relevant socioeconomic and environmental policies and actions, where appropriate. This details the Partys priorities, implementation and support needs, as well as plans and actions for climate change adaptation. The adaptation communication (AC) referred to in decision 9/CMA.131, has the objective of increasing the visibility and profile of adaptation and its balance with mitigation, strengthening adaptation action and support for developing countries, providing inputs to the global stocktake and enhancing learning and understanding of adaptation needs and actions.

Dominica has taken the decision for its AC, which is flexible and country-driven, to constitute the adaptation and resilience components of its updated NDC, along with other national documents and international communications, including, inter alia, the National Climate Change Policy and Action Plan (2019-2024), which is intended to constitute Dominicas NAP and the NRDS and LCCRDS, in compliance with decision 9/CMA.1.

Dominicas priority areas for adaptation action are largely based on the priority risks arising due to climate change presented in table 1. These risks include sea level rise, storm surge and climate variability, as well as increased frequency and magnitude of extreme weather events; and the impacts on property, infrastructure, agriculture, health and tourism sectors etc. Table 15 lists the in-progress and planned adaptation projects dependent upon financial support.

Ecosystem-based approaches to adaptation or the conservation, sustainable management and restoration of ecosystems to help communities adapt to the impacts of climate change are being promoted in the context of tailor-made, national cost-effective measures, which are accessible to local communities and indigenous peoples in the areas of intervention. Such approaches include, for example, integrated water and coastal resources management, including restoration of riparian forests and mangroves sites located in protected areas and/or key ecosystems that use nature as a solution to reduce vulnerability to climate change.

Four main pillars for adaptation have been identified for the Blue Economy:

Caribbean Institute of Meteorology and Hydrology (CIMH) and the Ministry of Health, provided support for the assessment.

2016  A Caribbean Climate Outlook Forum (CARICOF) took place in Dominica focused on discussions on health and climate change. This CARICOF brought together Caribbean Meteorologists, experts in health and climate, researchers and other members of the Caribbean Climate Scientific Community to discuss the climate outlook and to identify areas for building climate services for health.

Training for all district health care workers on the impacts of climate change on health was conducted by the Ministry of Health. This is in keeping with the Pan American Health Organisation (PAHO) Directing Council strategy and plan of action to build capacity among public health workers and leaders to address climate related conditions.

A national media campaign was conducted to highlight the health impact of climate change.

Previously climate change was mostly regarded as an environmental phenomenon.

Dominica has been identified as the pilot country for the Health Exemplar under the GFCS.

The agriculture sector has the potential to achieve climate action goals under all three components: mitigation  such as through better land-use management practices and land- based carbon sequestration (section 5.2.3), adaptation  such as through crop genetic diversity, increased soil organic matter which improves adaptive capacity by increasing soil water holding capacity and soil fertility, while also sequestering carbon (mitigation co-benefits); and resilience  such as improved pasture and grassland management (7.2). Climate-Smart Agriculture (CSA) represents an integrated approach to achieving these, as well as food security through, inter alia, the management of landscapes, including cropland, livestock, forests and fisheries. Table 14 details some of the ongoing and planned climate adaptation projects for the agriculture sector in Dominica under Climate Smart Agriculture.

Table (14): Summary of Climate Change Adaptation Activities contingent on Financial Support32 - Rehabilitation of trails and facilities within National Parks and Ecotourism sites - Land suitability and capability mapping - Development of water resource inventory, water resource management plan for regulation of harvesting, conservation and export - Climate-smart crops; crop diversification programs; low-carbon agricultural technologies; improved agricultural production systems - Sustainable soil and land management; watershed protection; sustainable development of non-timber forest products and wildlife farming - Climate change impact management and resilience; institutional strengthening and capacity building within the agriculture and fisheries sector - Development of an Agricultural Information Management System - Establishment of an Integrated Coastal and Watershed Management Plan and supporting institutional framework - Product development, diversification and technological advancement within the marine environment - Legal establishment of Department of Climate Change, Environment and Development to ensure effective coordination and implementation of the SPCR and other programs under Dominicas Low-Carbon Climate-Resilient Development Strategy; and to serve as National Implementing Entity under - Establishment of sustainable climate change and disaster risk financing mechanisms:

Micro-finance and micro-insurance for farmers, fisher folk, private sector, vulnerable communities, in particular the Kalinago community  Climate change and disaster risk management insurance for vulnerable communities: tourism, agriculture, fisheries - Construction of coastal and river defences; slope stabilisation; retrofitting houses, roads, bridges and critical infrastructure - Improved transportation, processing and storage of agriculture/fisheries products - Retrofitting/construction of community multi-purpose emergency shelters - Implementation and enforcement of environmental protection legislation and climate-smart building codes - Establishment of community-based early warning systems, disaster risk management structures and monitoring - Community-based vulnerability mapping, adaptation planning and disaster risk management supported by education and awareness programs - Implementation of climate-smart building codes and development of effective monitoring capabilities to build resilience within the construction industry, including education and awareness at the community level, legislation and effective enforcement/monitoring of coastal erosion - Research, measurement and monitoring of coastal dynamics; enhanced protection of river banks and protected areas; climate change risk management capacity building in key infrastructure and water resource management agencies - Development of supporting enabling framework in response to climate change for communities and vulnerable sections of society: women, youth, elderly, persons with disabilities, to manage their specific risks to vulnerable sectors eg. agriculture, fisheries, water resources; and impacts on eg.

- Effective waste and waste-water treatment management; maintenance of stormwater drainage and increased water storage and treatment capacity - Establishment of Integrated Coastal Zone and Watershed Management Planning Framework including:

- Establishment of zoning/land management plans for development in vulnerable areas - Development of natural wind breaks and soil erosion reduction through natural systems Dominica has taken several steps towards its ultimate goal of becoming the worlds first climate- resilient nation. The climate resilience vision is a developmental paradigm which seeks to climate-proof (to be resilient against the destructive impacts of extreme weather events) the key pillars of national policy, which are: economic diversification, sustainable and inclusive growth, employment creation and revenue generation, social development, social protection and poverty reduction, environmental management and cultural preservation. A multi-sectoral approach has been undertaken (refer to tables 15 and 16), which include several multi-targets, along with a multitude of donor-funded projects all aimed at enhancing national resilience. Several measures have been taken to increase public knowledge on resilience, as well as integrating climate- resilience and disaster risk management into national growth and development planning frameworks. To foster climate change resilience and empowerment, a decentralized approach was adopted utilizing four levels: household, community, district and national. These initiatives have been accompanied by capacity-building activities, supported by the establishment of necessary regulatory and institutional frameworks, as well as systematic frameworks for evaluation, monitoring, reporting and verification.

While there are several sectors and issues identified by national stakeholders during the SPCR and INDC planning processes as being important to address climate change risks in Dominica, there are a few that require priority attention if climate resilience is to be achieved. These priorities have been identified by national stakeholders during the SPCR planning process and INDC development process. They have not yet been funded or implemented under the DVRP and possess the greatest potential to contribute to the successful transformation of the country onto a climate-resilient, low-carbon development path. These include:

(a) Addressing climate change mitigation measures on the basis that savings in energy costs will allow Dominica to invest more in priority and much needed adaptation measures (b) Establishment of community off-grid mini-grid or micro-grid renewable energy electrical supply systems (backed up by emergency alternative energy systems such bio-diesel generators should local conditions allow for the operation to be efficiently established) in vulnerable communities on the east and south east coasts that are periodically without electricity (c) Establishing early warning systems, multi-use disaster shelters (powered by renewable energy and back up bio-diesel generators) and emergency preparedness training programs in (d) Facilitating capacity building through education, awareness and training programs on climate change risk management and resiliency measures in order to strengthen capacity at the community and sectoral level, within municipalities, local authorities and the private sector (e) Promotion of food security through climate-resilient Agricultural/Fisheries Development to build climate resilient communities by strengthening capacity to address climate change risks to coordination/implementation of priority climate change measures and the mainstreaming of climate change activities into national, sectoral and community planning/development (g) Creating the supportive enabling framework whereby communities and vulnerable segments of society (women, youth, elderly, people with disabilities) can manage their own climate change risks, thereby addressing climate change impacts on vulnerable sectors (particularly agriculture, fisheries and water resources) and threats to food security, human health, poverty alleviation, (h) Establishing a sustainable financing mechanism to ensure timely and direct access to international climate change financing to implement priority climate change risks management The goal of the NAP is to promote a sustainable and resilient agriculture and food system which supports conservation and sustainable use of Dominicas natural resources, preservation of biodiversity and ecosystems, while ensuring food and nutrition security, wealth creation, employment, diversified livelihoods and rural development. The NAP has three main policy pillars:

Sustainable Intensification of Production Systems  Competitive and Innovative Agricultural Chains  Food Security and Nutrition Under the NAP, falls the mandate for the operationalization of Dominica as a Global Centre for Agricultural Resilience. Government considers the establishment of an institutional mechanism and protocols for decision-making and actions to guide and manage Dominicas transition to a GCAR as essential. The transition is expected to be undertaken in two phases:

GCAR Operationalisation: The initial focus of the GCAR will be on climate and disaster risk resilience and management in primary production, the base of all agriculture value chains. The development of an Agricultural Climate Resilience Information System will necessitate a digital agriculture strategy involving:

- Infrastructural capacities and systems to collect climate data and for storage management and information dissemination - Licenses to access climate and other related data - Efficient systems for data collection, with  Institutional Oversight and Coordinating Mechanism:

Government shall work through the NAC and IMCM, along with its international development partners to determine an institutional mechanism to manage Dominicas transition to a GCAR. Critical success factors for determination of an institutional mechanism include:

Dominicas GDP is highly dependent on its agricultural sector. As a result, particular emphasis has been placed on enhancing the adaptive capacity and resiliency of this sector, as evidenced by the intention to establish Dominica as a Global Centre for Agriculture Resilience (refer to Box 10 for further details). In this context, resilience refers to the ability of an agricultural system to anticipate and prepare for, as well as adapt to, absorb and recover from the impacts of changes in climate and extreme weather33. Climate-Resilient Agriculture (CRA) represents an approach, which includes the sustainable use of natural resources through crop and livestock production systems, in order to achieve increased long-term productivity and farm incomes under a changing climate. The NRDS has developed critical indicators for the agricultural sector, which are aimed at tracking progress in the attainment of the Paris Agreement and the SDGs. In the pursuit of climate-smart agricultural growth through modernization and diversification, the NRDS has identified the following as key indicators for the agricultural sector:

Increased number of farmers involved in hydroponics and other non-soil agricultural  Doubling of technology transfer from regional organizations and bilateral partners  Increased number of export crops and types (100% increase in number; 50% increase in  Increase in the contribution of the agricultural sector to GDP by 50% for 7 years  50% reduction in agricultural loss to extreme weather events - Reduction of root crop  Value chain of 3 root crops fully developed with sustained marketing arrangements  Higher level of budget for research and development on climate-resilient crops and Agriculture has always been considered one of the main drivers of deforestation and forest degradation. Recognising the pivotal role of the agriculture sector in the achievement of 2014-2019 and a mid-term NAGP 2021-2030 were developed as part of the supporting regulatory framework. The NAGP is complemented by the development of an Agriculture and Food Systems Transformation Roadmap to provide guidance on transformative actions required to increase the resilience of crops, livestock and fisheries farming systems in alignment with the goals and objectives of the NAGP. Both policies have several synergies with the national development agenda, specifically, the Growth and Social Protection Strategy, Dominica Low- Carbon Climate-Resilient Development Strategy (2012 - 2020), the draft Food and Nutrition Policy and Plan of Action, the National Disaster Management Plan and draft legislation and all sectoral policies relevant to the agriculture sector. As agriculture represents a main sector of Dominicas economy, there must be coherence between policies in the agriculture and forestry sectors, especially with regards to climate change. The ADRM has three main objectives: food and nutrition security, poverty reduction and climate change adaptation. The ADRM was designed to:

Improve the resilience of agriculture-based livelihoods, with specific focus on clear objectives such as strengthening technical capacities and institutional frameworks for disaster risk reduction (DRM) within the agriculture sector, while concurrently fostering efficient and  Establish a sustainable mechanism for integrated financial resource mobilization that facilitates continued implementation of DRM activities.

The Monitoring and Evaluation framework of the NAGP will facilitate effective management and oversight of its implementation. The ME framework outlines specific indicators, which establishes measures to track its performance. This framework includes a combination of macro- level, value chain, farm management and natural resource management indicators, which will assist in tracking the contribution to economy, identify trends which need to be enhanced or reversed, identify investment options to improve performance of the overall sector and its sub- sectors and enable evidence-based decision-making.

Persons (total, youth, male, female) employed in agriculture (Number, Percentage)  Annual public spending on agriculture as a percentage of total public expenditure  Annual public spending on Research and Development as a percentage of total public  Domestic supply of agricultural raw materials for agro-based industries (Percentage)  Agricultural land cultivated using organic principles and standards (Percentage)  Complete ban of Class I, restricted use of Class II, and % reduced use of Class III and IV  Farms basing agricultural inputs on analytical and diagnostic test/results (Number, Acres)  Farmers and fishers adopting improved production practices through innovative technologies  Farms adopting Sloping Agricultural Land Technology (SALT) on sloped lands of more than - Updated national curriculum (with DRR and civics)  delivered to 20,000 children committees equipped with a communicated DMP and all resources ahead of hurricane season committees equipped with a communicated DMP and all resources ahead of hurricane season - Community Emergency Readiness:

