Reducing Greenhouse Gases in the United States:

The United States Nationally Determined Contribution Reducing Greenhouse Gases in the United States: A 2030 Emissions Target __________________________________________________________________ This submission communicates the United States nationally determined contribution (NDC) in line with Article 4 of the Paris Agreement. The Paris Agreement establishes a goal of holding the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2o C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature to 1.5o C.

Climate change is an existential threat and demands bold action. Solutions exist today to reduce emissions rapidly while supporting economic growth and improving quality of life. Addressing the climate crisis requires scaling the many solutions we already have, while investing in innovation to improve and broaden the set of solutions, enabling multiple pathways to reach global net zero emissions.

After a careful process involving analysis and consultation across the United States federal government and with leaders in state, local, and tribal governments, the United States is setting an economy-wide target of reducing its net greenhouse gas emissions by 50-52 percent below 2005 levels in 2030. The National Climate Advisor developed this NDC in consultation with the Special Presidential Envoy for Climate, and it was approved by President Joseph R. Biden Jr..

Deploying zero-carbon solutions in the United States will create good jobs and improve the health of our families and communities. Local air pollution reductions that come along with reaching this goal will avoid tens of thousands of premature deaths by 2030. The United States is committed to standing with the workers and communities too often left behind  people and places that have suffered as a result of economic and energy shifts  and creating well-paid employment in the low carbon economy. The United States reaffirms its commitment to the creation of decent work and quality jobs as an integral part of its efforts to combat climate change. The United States will work to ensure that our firms and workers are not put at an unfair competitive disadvantage and cooperate with allies and partners that are committed to fighting climate change. As appropriate, and consistent with domestic approaches to reduce United States greenhouse gas emissions, this includes consideration of carbon border adjustments in relation to carbon-intensive goods.

Furthermore, acknowledging that the worst impacts of climate change have hit historically disadvantaged communities hardest, the United States is committed to environmental justice and to prioritizing investment that benefits these communities. In addition, American innovation will increase the diversity of available and accessible low-cost low-carbon technologies to eliminate greenhouse gas emissions. The United States also notes the importance of natural climate solutions, terrestrial and marine, in climate ambition and resilience. It further recognizes the role of the broader suite of ocean-based climate solutions, including scaling-up offshore renewable energy and reducing emissions from shipping and ports, in increasing climate ambition and creating jobs.

There are multiple paths to reach this goal, and the United States federal and subnational governments have many tools available to work with civil society and the private sector, mobilizing investment to meet these goals while supporting a strong economy. The solutions are affordable, and the cost of inaction far outweighs the cost of action in economic and humanitarian terms.

Based on preliminary estimates, the United States is expected to have met and surpassed its 2020 target of net economy-wide emissions reductions in the range of 17 percent below 2005 levels and is broadly on track to achieve 26-28 percent emissions reductions below 2005 levels in 2025. The 2030 target represents increased ambition made possible in part through advances in technology and resulting market responses.

A whole-of-government approach on climate action at the federal level will play an important role in achieving our target in 2030, building upon and benefiting from a long history of leadership on climate ambition and innovation from state, local, and tribal governments. Strong and predictable policy frameworks support private investment in innovation and deployment of carbon pollution-free technology and infrastructure, spurring markets that drive continued progress. All levels of government and the private sector will partner to drive and implement this NDC and create a more equitable, resilient, zero carbon future for the American people.

The National Climate Advisor and the White House Office of Domestic Climate Policy, in consultation with relevant departments and agencies across the federal government, conducted a detailed analysis to underpin this 2030 target, reviewing a range of pathways for each sector of the economy that produces CO2 and non-CO2 greenhouse gases: electricity, transportation, buildings, industry, and the land sector. Technology availability, current costs and available savings, and future cost reductions were considered, as well as the role of enabling infrastructure. Standards, incentives, programs, and support for innovation were all weighed in the analysis.

In addition to the techno-economic analysis, the National Climate Advisor and the White House Office of Domestic Climate Policy ran an interagency process across the federal government and consulted a range of other stakeholders, including groups representing: tens of millions of advocates and activists including environmental justice leaders; the unions that collectively bargain for millions of Americans who have built our country and work to keep it running; thousands of scientists; hundreds of governmental leaders including governors, mayors, and tribal leaders; hundreds of businesses; hundreds of schools and institutions of higher education; as well as many specialized researchers focused on questions of pollution reduction.

Sector-by-sector Pathways to 2030 In developing the NDC, the United States considered sector-by-sector emissions reduction pathways. Each policy considered for reducing emissions is also an opportunity to improve equity and support good jobs in the United States.

The United States will decarbonize the energy sector, including by cutting energy waste; shifting to carbon pollution-free electricity; electrifying and driving efficiency in vehicles, buildings, and parts of industry; and scaling up new energy sources and carriers such as carbon-free hydrogen. Actions to be pursued include, for example:

Electricity: The United States has set a goal to reach 100 percent carbon pollution-free electricity by 2035, which could be achieved through multiple cost-effective technology and investment pathways, each resulting in meaningful emissions reductions in this decade. Eliminating greenhouse gases from the electricity sector will also reduce air and water pollution, improving public health while supporting good jobs building modern infrastructure. Policies that contribute to emissions reduction pathways consistent with the NDC include incentives and standards to reduce pollution. The federal government will work with state, local, and tribal governments to support the rapid deployment of carbon pollution-free electricity generating resources, transmission, and energy storage and leverage the carbon pollution-free energy potential of power plants retrofitted with carbon capture and existing nuclear, while ensuring those facilities meet robust and rigorous standards for worker, public, environmental safety and environmental justice. The United States will also support research, development, demonstration, commercialization, and deployment of software and hardware to support a carbon pollution-free, resilient, reliable, and affordable electricity system.

Transportation: The largest sources of emissions from transportation are light-duty vehicles like SUVs, pickup trucks, and cars, followed by heavy trucks, aircraft, rail, and ships. These transportation modes are highly dependent on fossil fuels, with more than 90 percent of transportation energy use coming from petroleum. Transportation provides essential access to services and economic opportunities, but has historically contributed to racial and environmental inequities in the United States. There are many opportunities to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from transportation while also saving money for households, improving environmental quality and health in communities, and providing more choices for moving people and goods. Policies that can contribute to emissions reduction pathways consistent with the NDC include: tailpipe emissions and efficiency standards; incentives for zero emission personal vehicles; funding for charging infrastructure to support multi-unit dwellings, public charging, and long-distance travel; and research, development, demonstration, and deployment efforts to support advances in very low carbon new-generation renewable fuels for applications like aviation, and other cutting-edge transportation technologies across modes. Investment in a wider array of transportation infrastructure will also make more choices available to travelers, including transit, rail, biking, and pedestrian improvements to reduce the need for vehicle miles traveled. While the emissions pathways analyzed focus on domestic emissions reduction, the United States is also exploring ways to support decarbonization of international maritime and aviation energy use through domestic action as well as through the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).

Buildings: Building sector emissions come from electricity use, as well as fossil fuels burned on site for heating air and water and for cooking. There are many options to avoid these emissions while reducing energy cost burden for families and improving health and resilience in communities. The emissions reduction pathways for buildings consider ongoing government support for energy efficiency and efficient electric heating and cooking in buildings via funding for retrofit programs, wider use of heat pumps and induction stoves, and adoption of modern energy codes for new buildings. The United States will also invest in new technologies to reduce emissions associated with construction, including for high-performance electrified buildings.

Industry: Emissions in the heavy industry sector come from energy use, including on- site fuel burning as well as electricity, and direct emissions resulting from industrial processes. The United States government will support research, development, demonstration, commercialization, and deployment of very low- and zero-carbon industrial processes and products. For example, the United States will incentivize carbon capture as well as new sources of hydrogen  produced from renewable energy, nuclear energy, or waste  to power industrial facilities. In addition, the United States government will use its procurement power to support early markets for these very low- and zero-carbon industrial goods.

Beyond the energy sector, the United States will also reduce emissions from forests and agriculture and enhance carbon sinks through a range of programs and measures for ecosystems ranging from our forests and agricultural soils to our rivers and coasts. Actions to be pursued include, for example:

Agriculture and lands: Americas vast lands provide opportunities to both reduce emissions, and sequester more carbon dioxide. The United States will support scaling of climate smart agricultural practices (including, for example, cover crops), reforestation, rotational grazing, and nutrient management practices. In addition, federal and state governments will invest in forest protection and forest management, and engage in intensive efforts to reduce the scope and intensity of catastrophic wildfires, and to restore fire-damaged forest lands. Alongside these efforts, the United States will support nature- based coastal resilience projects including pre-disaster planning as well as efforts to increase sequestration in waterways and oceans by pursuing blue carbon.

The United States also recognizes the crucial importance of reducing non-CO2 greenhouse gases, including methane, hydrofluorocarbons and other potent short-lived climate pollutants. Actions to be pursued include, for example:

Non-CO2 Greenhouse Gas Emissions: The United States will implement the American Innovation and Manufacturing (AIM) Act to phase down the use of hydrofluorocarbons. To address methane, the United States will update standards and invest in plugging leaks from wells and mines and across the natural gas distribution infrastructure. In addition, it will offer programs and incentives to improve agricultural productivity through practices and technologies that also reduce agricultural methane and N2O emissions, such as improved manure management and improved cropland nutrient management.

NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION The nationally determined contribution of the United States of America is: To achieve an economy-wide target of reducing its net greenhouse gas emissions by 50-52 percent below 2005 levels in 2030.

INFORMATION FOR CLARITY, TRANSPARENCY, AND UNDERSTANDING Recalling Article 4.8 of the Paris Agreement, as well as decision 4/CMA1 and its Annex 1, the United States provides the following descriptive and contextual information to enhance the clarity, transparency, and understanding of the United States NDC.

Information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding of the United States nationally determined contribution 1. Quantifiable information on the reference point (including, as appropriate, a base year):

United States net emissions in 2005, as published in the Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks (Inventory) on an annual basis. At the time of submission, this value is reported as 6635 million tonnes CO2e in the Inventory submitted April 15 2021. This value may be adjusted in the future as described below in 1(f).

Information sources of data on greenhouse gas emissions and removals as reported in the Inventory on an annual basis. At the time of submission, Annex 6.4 of the Inventory submitted on April 15, 2021, linked here, contains a full list of sources of data for the Inventory.

Consistent with IPCC good practice guidance, and paragraph 28 of Decision 18/CMA1 Annex 1, the United States is committed to improving the quality of its inventory and will perform recalculations to the inventory time series as needed to reflect the latest data and to maintain methodological consistency over time. The carbon dioxide equivalent mass of net greenhouse gas emissions used as a basis in tracking progress towards the NDC target will be the 2005 net emissions reported in the most recent Inventory at the time of submission of the relevant biennial transparency report (BTR).

2. Time frames and/or periods for implementation:

3. Scope and coverage:

Economy-wide target of reducing net greenhouse gas emissions by 50-52 percent below 2005 levels in 2030 1 As described in Section 5, progress towards the implementation and of the NDC will be tracked using annual net GHG emissions for 2021 through 2030, compared with net greenhouse gas emissions for 2005. The achievement of the NDC will be assessed by comparing net greenhouse gas emissions for 2030 with net greenhouse gas emissions for 2005.

The NDC is economy-wide. It reflects all anthropogenic emissions and removals as reported in the Inventory, and specifically:

All sectors, as defined by the IPCC 2006 guidelines;  All greenhouse gases included in the IPCC 2006 guidelines;  All categories, as included in the IPCC 2006 guidelines, occurring in the United States;  All carbon pools, as included in Volume 5 of the IPCC 2006 guidelines.

The United States has included all categories of anthropogenic emissions or removals in its NDC. No source, sink, or activity that was included in the previous version of the NDC has been excluded.

4. Planning processes:

Executive Order 14008, dated January 27, 2021, specified that the United States would immediately begin the process of developing its NDC under the Paris Agreement and that the process would include analysis and input from relevant executive departments and agencies, as well as appropriate outreach to domestic stakeholders.

The National Climate Task Force2 conducted a whole-of-government process to develop this nationally determined contribution. The process included a bottom-up analysis of existing and potential policies and measures at the federal level, accounting for capital stock turnover, technology trends, infrastructure needs, and continued subnational policies and measures. The analysis considered multiple pathways across all sources of greenhouse gas emissions:

The energy sector including electricity, transportation, buildings, and industry;  Land sector CO2 including forests and soil carbon, as well as other opportunities for emissions reductions, such as ocean-based solutions; and,  Non-CO2 greenhouse gases including hydrofluorocarbons, methane and N2O, as well as other opportunities for reducing black carbon emissions. In addition to the emission reductions included in the Inventory and as part of the NDC, the United States continues to explore opportunities to advance reductions in black carbon emissions and ocean-based emissions. In addition to the techno-economic analysis, the National Climate Advisor and the White House Office of Domestic Climate Policy ran an interagency process across the federal government and consulted a range of other stakeholders, including groups representing tens of millions of advocates and activists including youth; the unions that collectively bargain for millions of Americans who have built our country and work to keep it running; thousands of scientists; hundreds of governmental leaders including governors, mayors, and tribal leaders; hundreds of businesses; hundreds of schools and institutions of higher education; as well as many specialized researchers focused on questions of pollution reduction.

2 The National Climate Task Force is comprised of the National Climate Advisor (Chair), Secretary of the Treasury, Secretary of Defense, Attorney General, Secretary of the Interior, Secretary of Agriculture, Secretary of Commerce, Secretary of Education, Secretary of Labor, Secretary of Health and Human Services, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, Secretary of Transportation, Secretary of Energy, Secretary of Homeland Security, Administrator of General Services, Chair of the Council on Environmental Quality, Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, Director of the Office of Management and Budget, Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy, Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism, and the Assistant to the President for Economic Policy.

Following this analysis, modeling, and consultation, the NDC was approved by President Joseph R. Biden Jr.

The United States developed its NDC to be both ambitious and achievable. It promotes the achievement of the Paris Agreements aims, including pursuing efforts to limit global average temperature increase to 1.5 degrees Celsius, as well as the need to drive toward net zero global emissions no later than 2050. The NDC was developed based on sector-by-sector assessments of emission reduction potential informed by a whole-of-government process via the National Climate Task Force, led by the White House Office of Domestic Climate Policy. Economy-wide projections about future greenhouse gas emissions were conducted using a detailed, bottom-up system dynamics model accounting for capital stock turnover timelines and relative costs of technology and equipment in each greenhouse gas emitting sector of the economy. It also considered and compared against economy-wide modeling from external research. The analysis considered the emissions reducing benefits from federal actions, including standards, investments, incentives, taxes, programs, and support for innovation. The assessments also included consideration of contributions from subnational actions, noting that states and local governments contribute substantially under the United States federal system to national efforts to reduce emissions. These analyses show that the United States can deliver on its NDC, including by investing in efficiency, beneficial electrification, clean energy, plugging methane leaks, addressing direct greenhouse gas emissions from industrial processes, climate smart agriculture and forestry, innovation, and other priorities. These actions will also create good jobs, improve public health, and help to advance equity and achieve environmental justice priorities. These investments will allow American firms to invest to develop and export innovative greenhouse gas-reducing solutions and put the United States on a path to achieve net- zero emissions, economy-wide, by no later than 2050.

5. Assumptions and methodological approaches, including those for estimating and accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and, as appropriate, removals:

The United States intends to apply a net-net accounting approach in accounting for the NDC. Net emissions in the target year will be compared against net emissions in the base year to calculate the percentage emissions reductions achieved. Consistent with Articles 4 and 6 of the Paris Agreement and any applicable guidance, in tracking progress towards and accounting for the NDC, the United States intends to make corresponding adjustments for any internationally transferred mitigation outcomes that the United States Government authorizes for use towards NDCs, and for mitigation outcomes that the United States authorizes for other international mitigation purposes. The estimates of emissions and removals used in accounting for the NDC are those reported in the Inventory, which follows IPCC good practice guidance and the guidance included in Section II of the Annex to 18/CMA1. The definitions, data sources, and b Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for the implementation of policies and measures or strategies in the nationally determined contribution;

Please see the information below on the approach to natural disturbances (e)(i) and harvested wood products (e)(ii), both of which take into account existing methods and guidance under the Convention.

In accounting for the NDC, the United States intends to use the IPCC 2006 guidelines (or any updated IPCC guidelines that may be agreed upon by the CMA in the future), and 100 year global warming potential from AR5, for estimating anthropogenic emissions and removals.

The United States may address emissions and subsequent removals from natural disturbances on managed lands in accounting for its NDC. Should such an approach be used, the same methodology will be applied for both the base year (2005) and target year (2030). The emissions and subsequent removals from such natural disturbances would be included in the national totals of the Inventory. Any approach used to address emissions and removals from natural disturbances will be consistent with the guidance included in the IPCC 2006 guidelines and any subsequent version or refinement, as applicable, and will draw on best practices generated by Parties that have addressed natural disturbances under the UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol. These include:

Reporting the CO2 and non-CO2 effects of natural disturbances where natural disturbances occur on lands that are subject to land-use change following the disturbance.

Reporting emissions from salvage logging.

Reflecting the same methodological approach to addressing natural disturbances in estimations for the base year and the target year.

The United States intends to use a production approach consistent with the IPCC 2006 Guidelines to estimate emissions and removals from Harvested Wood Products, consistent with paragraph 56 of the Annex to decision 18/CMA.1. The methodology is described in detail in the Inventory.

The reference indicator for the NDC is net greenhouse gas emissions in 2005, as published in the Inventory on an annual basis. The definitions, data sources, and models used to estimate net emissions are those described in the Inventory.

At this time, the United States does not intend to use voluntary cooperation using cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6.2 or the mechanism referred to in Article 6.4 in order to achieve its target. Should the United States decide to use such voluntary cooperation towards achievement of its target or to authorize the use of internationally transferred mitigation outcomes towards the NDCs of other Parties, it would report on such use or authorization through its biennial transparency reports and consistent with any guidance adopted under Article 6.

6. How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances:

The United States NDC exceeds a straight-line path to achieve net-zero emissions, economy-wide, by no later than 2050. It also promotes the goal of keeping within reach a 1.5 degree Celsius limit on global average temperature increase.

While Article 4.3 does not necessarily apply to this NDC, the United States nevertheless notes that this NDC substantially increases ambition compared to the NDC previously submitted in relation to 2025.

The NDC is an absolute economy-wide emissions reduction target.

7. How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2:

As noted above, this NDC exceeds the pace required for a straight-line path to achieve net-zero emissions, economy-wide, by no later than 2050. This NDC would therefore contribute substantially towards achieving the ultimate objective of the UNFCCC of stabilizing greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system, and within a time frame sufficient to allow ecosystems to adapt naturally to climate change, to ensure that food production is not threatened and to enable economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner.

As noted above, the United States NDC is consistent with the Paris Agreement temperature goal of holding the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels, recognizing that this would significantly reduce the risks and impacts of climate change (Article 2.1(a)). This NDC is expected to put the United States on a path to achieve net-zero emissions, economy-wide, by no later than 2050, which would contribute substantially to the aim outlined in Article 4.1 to reach global peaking of greenhouse gas emissions as soon as possible, and to undertake rapid reductions thereafter in accordance with best available science, so as to achieve a balance between anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks of greenhouse gases in the second half of this century.

