1. Quantifiable information on the reference point (including, as appropriate, a base year) (a) Reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s) (b) Quantifiable information on the reference indicators, their values in the reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s), and, as applicable, in the target year The reference point is total GHG emissions excl. LULUCF in 1990 as reported in the National GHG inventory. In the GHG inventory compiled in 2020, covering the years 19902018, base year emissions amounted to 5 383 Gg CO2 equivalent.

(c) For strategies, plans and actions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement, or polices and measures as components of nationally determined contributions where paragraph 1(b) above is not applicable, Parties to provide other relevant information (d) Target relative to the reference indicator, expressed numerically, for example as a percentage or amount of reduction At least a 35% reduction in total national GHG emissions (excl. LULUCF) by 2030 compared to 1990 (base year).

(e) Information on the sources of data used in quantifying the reference point(s) National GHG inventory prepared in 2020; as this GHG inventory has not been submitted to the UNFCCC yet, a summary table of GHG emissions is included in Annex I.

(f) Information on the circumstances under which the Party may update the values of the reference indicators According to the IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories it is good practice to continuously improve the quality of GHG emission inventories. This implies increases in completeness, accuracy (e.g. use of higher-tier methods), consistency, comparability and transparency. For this reason, updates and recalculations due to methodological improvements will be carried out and will affect the reference level. Information on recalculations will be included in biennial reporting to the UNFCCC (BUR and from 2024 onwards BTR). For the next NDC revision cycle, the following improvements are planned:

Including the LULUCF sector in the target, which has currently not been possible due to the uncertainty of data in the sector. For Montenegro, the LULUCF carries high potential as a carbon sink.

Including adaptation actions; work on the national adaptation strategy has just started, and adaptation plans are not yet available.

Alignment with energy data included in the National Energy and Climate Plan, which is currently under preparation and will be finalized in 2022.

(a) Timeframe and/or period for implementation, including start and end date, consistent with any further relevant decision adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA) The implementation period is from 1 January 202131 December 2030. Progress will be tracked through the biennial reporting of GHG emission inventories to the UNFCCC and specified progress indicators. The First Biennial Transparency report is to be developed by the end of 2024.

(b) Whether it is a single-year or multi-year target, as applicable Single-year target, namely 2030 (a) General description of the target Economy-wide GHG emission reduction target of 35% by 2030 compared to base year (1990) emissions, excluding LULUCF (b) Sectors, gases, categories and pools covered by the nationally determined contribution, including, as applicable, whether it is consistent with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) guidelines IPCC sectors included:

Waste Emissions/removals from Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) have been estimated in the GHG inventory but are not included in the NDC. This is due to the limited information available on the future development of the LULUCF sector, which is planned to be solved for the next NDC revision. Gases included:

Sulphur hexafluoride (SF6): Nitrogen trifluoride (NF3) does not occur in the category 2.E Production of HFC/PFC and SF6 and has not been estimated in the category 2.F. Consumption of HFC/PFC and SF6 due to a lack of data. Therefore NF3 emissions are currently not included.

(c) How the Party has taken into consideration paragraph 31(c) and (d) of decision 1/CP.21 All sources, sinks and activities included in the previous NDC and GHG inventory continue to be included. Efforts are being made to further increase the completeness of the GHG inventory. Notation keys have been used in accordance with the IPCC 2006 Guidelines (Volume 1). The notation key not estimated (NE) has been used for the following categories due to a lack of activity data.

- 1A5 Energy: other - 3F Field burning of agricultural residues - 5B Biological treatment of solid waste - 5C Waste incineration The notation key not occurring (NO) has been used for the following categories, as these activities are not taking place in Montenegro - 2A Mineral industry - 2B Chemical industry - 2E Production of halocarbons and SF6 - 3C Rice cultivation - 3E Prescribed burning of savannahs Further information on the notation keys used is accessible in the GHG inventory summary tables provided in the Annex of the NDC.

(d) Mitigation co-benefits resulting from Parties adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans, including description of specific projects, measures and initiatives of Parties adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans While for years the focus of climate change policy has been climate change mitigation, despite there being many vulnerable areas and sectors, a shift toward adaptation is now present. An improvement was achieved with adoption of the Law on Protection against Climate Change in 2019. It mandates the preparation of the National Adaptation Plan consisting of adaptation measures and an associated financial assessment of adaptation measures. A limited number of strategies contain adaptation actions, though their implementation is moving slowly due to insufficient financial or institutional support.

In the first half of 2021 the Government of Montenegro (GoM), in cooperation with United Nations Development Programme and Green Climate Fund, initiated the project: Enhancing Montenegros capacity to integrate climate change risks into planning. The project focuses on improving Montenegros institutional capacity for long-term adaptation planning, initially focusing on improving the coordination framework and building the capabilities of those involved in the CC and CCA coordination framework. Then, as the coordination framework is strengthened, actions will be taken to improve the information base by determining climate risks and identifying appropriate measures  investments, projects and programmes. Relying on consultations conducted with national stakeholders and a stocktaking exercise to inform the development of an adaptation process and preparation of the project Enhancing Montenegros capacity to integrate climate change risks into planning, the GoM concluded that water, agriculture, tourism and health were the initial sectors that the GoM would like to focus on and these have remained priority intervention sectors to this date. The identified sectors were prioritized due to their importance in Montenegros development and their high level of vulnerability. An overview of these and additional sectors is presented below:

Water sector: The adaptation activities are focused more on the water sector, as it is most vulnerable to droughts, heavy rains and a high intensity of precipitation. Due to the observed and projected drought, Montenegro can expect a reduction in gross revenues from hydroelectricity sales, and pressure on water use in the summer as a consequences of the higher population density in the coastal region and tourism.

Infrastructure & transport: Adaptation activities in infrastructure to resist extreme heat or precipitation will also promote a modal shift towards a lower fossil fuel intensity in the transport sector.

Agriculture: The mitigation co-benefits of adaptation actions in agriculture are: the enhancement of carbon sinks by an increase in resilient species in areas vulnerable to forest fires; development of micro-reservoirs; the use of renewable energy for cooling and heating; harvest storage; and changes to food processing.

Soils: Actions carried out to prevent soil degradation (e.g. in the CAMP project) reduce land degradation with green-belt barriers and thereby contribute to increasing carbon sinks.

Forestry: Activities, such as the strengthening of the forestry infrastructure and the monitoring of logging, are also contributing to an increase in carbon sinks.

Energy sector: The mitigation co-benefits of adaptation in the energy sector are linked to renewable energies, and accordingly to a decrease in fossil fuel consumption. Also improvements to insulation will reduce the consumption of electricity and wood for heating and decrease cooling needs.

Tourism in Montenegro has increased substantially in the last decade with notable increases in the number of visitors and investments in the tourist infrastructure. As such, tourism has become one of the main sectors of the economy. A report from the World Tourism and Travel Council (WTTC), which analyses and ranks the impact of tourism on GDP, employment, exports and investment, and covers 184 countries, estimated that tourism will make up 28% of GDP by 2028. As such, and in accordance with the GoMs commitment to sustainable development and environmental protection, the concept of the development of green/responsible tourism on the principles of low-carbon development is considered vital and adaptation measures must be taken to protect this sector.

Good public health depends on safe drinking water, sufficient food, secure shelter and good social conditions, which may well all be affected by a changing climate  and these are particularly important in the context of economies in transition, such as Montenegros. It is important to consider that climate change could affect the capacity of health services to deal with emergencies. Adaptation measures in the health sector should focus on the strengthening of existing institutional capacities, information dissemination, resilience of health infrastructure, and monitoring systems to better understand the impacts of climate change on human health in Montenegro.

Some climate mitigation measures, such as the refurbishment of the coal power plant in Pljevlja and the technological improvements in the aluminium production facility will have substantial co-benefits for the reduction of air pollutants. These co-benefits have not been quantified yet. But as a first step, the GHG and air emission inventory are being prepared in parallel, which thereby ensures consistency among the inventories.

(a) Information on the planning processes that the Party undertook to prepare its nationally determined contribution and, if available, on the Partys implementation plans, including, as appropriate:

Protection Agency, the Institute for Public Health, the Institute for Meteorology and Seismology, Water Management Institute, the State Statistical Office and two NGOs. As a final step, the updated NDC was approved by the government on xxxxxx.

(i) Domestic institutional arrangements, public participation and engagement with local communities and indigenous peoples, in a gender-responsive manner the various forms of vulnerability is needed. Also, the participation of women in finding and implementing climate change solutions needs to be further addressed.

(ii) Contextual matters, including, inter alia, as appropriate:

a. National circumstances, such as geography, climate, economy, sustainable development and poverty eradication b. Best practices and experience related to the preparation of the nationally determined contribution c. Other contextual aspirations and priorities acknowledged when joining the Paris Agreement b. The preparation of an internal background report, to provide stakeholders with additional information on how the NDC target was derived, proved very useful. The identification of progress indicators per sector and measure will support the progress tracking as required per Decision 18/CMA.1  III. Information necessary to track progress made in implementing and achieving nationally determined contributions under Article 4 of the Paris Agreement.

c. Montenegro is among the group of UN member countries which have officially adopted a National Strategy for Sustainable Development until 2030, which follows the UN Agenda 2030.

(b) Specific information applicable to Parties, including regional economic integration organizations and their member states, that have reached an agreement to act jointly under Article 4, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement, including the Parties that agreed to act jointly and the terms of the agreement, in accordance with Article 4, paragraphs 1618, of the Paris Agreement The updated NDC target for 2030 will be fulfilled by the State of Montenegro and is not part of the regional joint agreement. Montenegro is a candidate country for membership of the EU and is currently implementing Negotiation Chapter 27 on The Environment and Climate Change. The chapter was opened in December 2018. Further efforts are needed to align the country with the EU2030 climate and energy policy framework. In 2007, Montenegro acceded to the Energy Community Treaty (ECT), which allows the country to be an active member of the Regional and European Energy Market, obliging the state to align its national energy-related legislation with the community acquis. Currently, work on preparing an Integrated National Energy and Climate Plans, as required by the EU Governance Regulation (EU 2018/1999) has started.

(c) How the Partys preparation of its nationally determined contribution has been informed by the outcomes of the global stocktake, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreement Montenegro participated in the Talanoa Dialogue during the COP24 in 2018 dedicated to raising global awareness for the necessary enhancement of NDCs by 2020. According to Article 14.2 of the Paris Agreement, the conference serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Agreement (CMA) shall undertake its first global stocktake in 2023 and every five years thereafter unless otherwise decided by the CMA. It is expected that the reduction commitments of the updated NDC of Montenegro will be considered in the Global Stocktake Report to be published in 2023.

(d) Each Party with a nationally determined contribution under Article 4 of the Paris Agreement that consists of adaptation action and/or economic diversification plans resulting in mitigation co-benefits consistent with Article 4, paragraph 7 of the Paris Agreement, is to submit information on:

(i) How the economic and social consequences of response measures have been considered in developing the nationally determined contribution.

(ii) Specific projects, measures and activities to be implemented to contribute to mitigation co-benefits, including information on adaptation plans that also yield mitigation co-benefits, which may cover, but are not limited to, key sectors, such as: energy, resources, water resources, coastal resources, human settlements and urban planning, agriculture and forestry; and economic diversification actions, which may cover, but are not limited to, sectors such as manufacturing and industry, energy and mining, transport and communication, construction, tourism, real estate, agriculture and fisheries.

As described above under 3(d), Montenegro has recently initiated the project Enhancing Montenegros capacity to integrate climate change risks into planning, which will contribute to establishing the national adaptation process and the adaptation strategy. Montenegro is also striving to harmonize its GHG and air emission inventories, which will also serve to assess co-benefits in a transparent and consistent way. There is also a CBIT (Capacity-Building Initiative for Transparency) project in the pipeline, which should strengthen the active stakeholder engagement, align MRV requirements with other national priorities (e.g. SDGs) and support technical capacities in view of the enhanced transparency framework (ETF). Information about the relevant outcomes of the mentioned activities will be included in the next NDC revision cycle.

(a) Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals corresponding to the Partys nationally determined contribution, consistent with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 31, and accounting guidance adopted by the CMA has been prepared documenting the national system, key categories, the QA/QC plan, methodologies and data sources used, recalculations, planned improvements for all IPCC sources and sinks. Consistent methodologies have been applied throughout the reported period (1990 2018), efforts have been made to apply country-specific data and ensure the application of the IPCC 2006 Guidelines. Any recalculations made take consideration of the whole time series (19902018) to ensure time series consistency. The largest recalculations occurred in the LULUCF sector. The application of country-specific and plant-specific emissions factors, especially for stationary combustion, led to higher accuracy. The tool to calculate GHG emissions is also designed to calculate air emissions, contributing to environmental integrity. Further capacity building and human resources are needed, so that Montenegro can continue reporting on GHG and air emissions without external support. The GHG inventory, specifically the total GHG emissions excl. LULUCF, will serve as the main indicator to track progress in achieving the NDC.

(b) Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for the implementation of policies and measures or strategies in the nationally determined contribution The climate mitigation policies and measures already implemented or with a realistic chance of being implemented in the coming years have been identified, based on the measures included in the 3rd National Communication, a review of national strategies and information received from stakeholders. A list of the climate mitigation measures relevant to achieving the revised NDC is provided in Annex II. Energy and IPPU: A baseline scenario was developed, which does not take into account any measures but is linked to the projected GDP development. The annual relative GDP growth used in the projections for the energy and IPPU sector is provided in Annex III. Then the impact of policies has been estimated and deducted from the BaU scenario to derive the NDC scenario emission path. To estimate the impact of energy efficiency measures, the LEAP has been used. Agriculture: As no measures with relevant impact on GHGs have been identified for the agricultural sector, only a BaU scenario has been developed. The projected trend of livestock numbers and fertilizer use considered in the projections is derived from FAO data and is available in Annex III. The same methodology and emission factors as for the GHG inventory has been applied.

Waste: The BaU scenario considers the projected waste generation rate according to population growth, while all other parameters (waste generation rate, waste composition, % deposited on SWDS and landfill gas recovery) are kept constant. The NDC scenario considers a reduction of biowaste landfilled according to the national targets set and a change in the waste composition. In the domestic wastewater sector, increased connection rates to the sewage system have been considered in line with the planned full implementation of the European Urban wastewater treatment Directive. The parameters used are presented in Annex III. LULUCF: No measures with a realistic chance of being implemented in the coming years have been identified. Therefore, only a BaU scenario has been developed, following the past trend in land use and land use changes, as well as a continuation of the levels of harvesting and forest fires. The LULUCF sector is not part of the target defined in this NDC.

(c) If applicable, information on how the Party will take into account existing methods and guidance under the Convention to account for anthropogenic emissions and removals, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 14, of the Paris Agreement, as appropriate (d) IPCC methodologies and metrics used for estimating anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals The GHG emission inventory used to set the updated NDC is in compliance with the IPCC 2006 Guidelines. The GWP values (for a 100-year time horizon) used are consistent with the ones presented in the IPCC 4th Assessment Report.

(e) Sector-, category- or activity-specific assumptions, methodologies and approaches consistent with IPCC guidance, as appropriate, including, as applicable:

(i) The approach to addressing emissions and subsequent removals from natural disturbances on managed lands (ii) The approach used to account for emissions and removals from harvested wood products (iii) The approach used to address the effects of the age- class structure in forests of sample trees. Age classes are taken into account implicitly in the estimation of the growth rates of the different species.

(f) Other assumptions and methodological approaches used for understanding the nationally determined contribution and, if applicable, estimating corresponding emissions and removals, including:

(i) How the reference indicators, baseline(s) and/or reference level(s), including, where applicable, sector-, category- or activity-specific reference levels, are constructed, including, for example, key parameters, assumptions, definitions, methodologies, data sources and models used (ii) For Parties with nationally determined contributions that contain non-greenhouse-gas components, information on assumptions and methodological approaches used in relation to those components, as applicable (iii) For climate forcers included in nationally determined contributions not covered by IPCC guidelines, information on how the climate forcers are estimated (g) The intention to use voluntary cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, if applicable The accounting rules for international carbon markets under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement have not been set yet. Montenegro has not made any national decision on this issue yet but is striving to participate in the EU emission trading scheme from 2025 onwards.

6. How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances (a) How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances Montenegro is a non-Annex-I country, highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change. National emissions of the greenhouse gases represent only 0.01% of global emissions (source: CAIT data, excl. LULUCF) and the net per capita GHG emissions in Montenegro in 2018 amounted to 5.4 Mg CO2eq per capita; in the EU27 this is 8.4 Mg CO2eq per capita (source: EEA GHG data viewer). Since 1990, the total national GHG emissions decreased by 30%, with the emission peaking in the early 1990s. Montenegro will take into account the ultimate objective of the UNFCCC in its future development and will be committed to decoupling greenhouse gas emissions from its economic growth and embark on a low-emission development pathway. The NDC serves as stepping stone and provides a development framework and guidance for more ambitious adaptation goals to be developed under project Enhancing Montenegros capacity to integrate climate change risks into planning. The goals defined by the NDC will have a clear effect on project activities focusing on addressing the gaps of:

A private sector that has a low capacity to understand and respond to climate vulnerabilities and risks With the GCF support, Montenegro will strengthen its institutional coordination framework, expanding the technical capacities of those responsible and involved in adaptation planning, enhance the evidence base required for effective decision making, and define a resource mobilization strategy. The NDC submitted by Montenegro is considered fair, taking into account the relatively low GDP per capita volumes compared to EU member countries. The ambition has been increased compared to the INDC, not only in relative terms but also absolute emission reductions. Further significant emission reductions will depend on policies targeting the two most important point sources (the thermoelectric power plant and aluminium production unit), which will have substantial social and economic consequences. So, for the moment the proposed NDC target of 35% is ambitious as it aims to secure significant reduction of its greenhouse gas emissions while satisfying the countrys need for economic development.

Montenegro sees itself as currently not being in a position to come forward with a more ambitious target.

The updated NDC target represents a progression beyond the current NDC and reflects the highest possible ambition, considering the national circumstances.

Montenegro is a developing country Party and has hereby enhanced its NDC, which represents an economy-wide emission reduction.

Not applicable.

7. How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2:

(a) How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2 Montenegro respects and supports the ultimate objective of the Convention and contributes with its highest possible ambition, reflected in this updated NDC.

(b) How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards Article 2, paragraph 1(a), and Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Paris Agreement.

Annex I: Summary of total national GHG emissions excluding LULUCF (1990, 2005, 2010, 2015, 2018) Note: Nitrogen trifluoride (NF3) is not included, as it does not occur in category 2.E Production of HFC/PFC and SF6 and has not been estimated in category 2.F. Consumption of HFC/PFC and SF6 due to a lack of data.

A. Fuel combustion (sector-level approach) 2 769.88 2 626.12 112.81 30.95 NA NA NA Total national emissions and removals 5 382.95 2 839.82 954.43 97.29 NO 1 490.64 0.78 A. Fuel combustion (sector-level approach) 2 250.14 2 178.06 51.93 20.16 NA NA NA Total national emissions and removals 4 139.67 2 384.46 726.22 67.88 90.37 869.31 1.43 A. Fuel combustion (sector-level approach) 2 657.04 2 572.85 58.55 25.65 NA NA NA Total national emissions and removals 4 110.39 2 710.39 686.96 72.99 141.32 497.18 1.55 A. Fuel combustion (sector-level approach) 2 506.73 2 427.41 54.46 24.86 NA NA NA Total national emissions and removals 3 535.83 2 518.96 668.92 68.53 205.27 71.93 2.23 A. Fuel combustion (sector-level approach) 2 743.57 2 667.29 48.95 27.33 NA NA NA Total national emissions and removals 3 767.26 2 763.74 649.28 69.79 235.91 46.02 2.52 *Notation keys: NA  not applicable; NE  not estimated; NO  not occurring.

The following renewable power plants are planned: a) New G8 turbine-generator unit in HPP capacity) c) WPP Gvozd (54.6 MW, 150 GWh) d) WPP Brajii (100 MW, 277 GWh) e) SPP Briska Gora (250 MW, 450 GWh) f) HPP Komarnica (172 MW, 213 GWh) g) SPP Velje Brdo (50 MW, 90 GWh) h) SPP prosumers (10 MW, 18 GWh) 65 557 eliminate lignite as a fuel used for heating purposes in Pljevlja at the latest by 2030. The phasing out of lignite used in Pljevlja municipalitys residential sector will result in a GHG emission reduction that follows the dynamics of the lignite decrease throughout the observed period.

Development and implementation of an energy efficiency regulatory framework in buildings The objective of this measure is to improve energy efficiency and comfort conditions in selected public-sector buildings. The implementation of the measure is expected to initiate the development of the services market in the construction sector and cause a positive impact on the overall socio- economic environment. It is also expected to achieve remarkable results in the area of environmental conservation. 3 18 Financial incentives for citizens/private households (for energy efficiency investments) The main objective of this measure is to establish systematic mechanisms for introducing energy efficiency criteria into the public procurement process, in order to achieve significant energy savings as well as financial and other benefits. The implementation of this measure is one of the 2 11 preconditions for meeting the requirements of the EUs EED approximation.

