Cover pictures courtesy of:

Jamaica remains committed to making its contribution as the world moves to address the challenge of climate change. In line with requirements of the Paris Agreement, the country has increased its ambition of the mitigation component of its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC). This increase in ambition comprises both a broadening of the NDCs sectoral scope and the delivery of greater emission reductions.

Jamaica has broadened its sectoral scope and taken steps to move towards an economy-wide target and will bring emissions from the land use change and forestry sector within its NDC for the first time. This reflects the importance of the forestry sector to Jamaica, which accounts for more than half of the islands total land use, and the important commitments that the country has made to preserve and enhance these stocks.

The country has identified opportunities to deepen the emission reductions it delivers in the energy sector. These opportunities are part of an increasingly comprehensive approach to decarbonising this sector that covers both the electricity generation, as well as energy use sub-sectors.

The result of these positive changes is that Jamaicas latest NDC will be significantly more ambitious. By 2030, it foresees emission reductions covering these two sectors of between 25.4 per cent (unconditional) and 28.5 per cent (conditional) relative to a business-as-usual scenario (which takes into account policies in place as of 2005). This implies that emissions in these sectors would be 1.8 to 2.0 MtCO2e lower than they otherwise be, compared with a range of 1.1 to 1.5 MtCO2e in its previous NDC.

A crucial feature of Jamaicas NDC is that it is based on the analytical work of the policies and grounded ambitious commitments that the country has already made. This ensures that the commitments are robust, benefiting from both political support and implementation plans already in place. This approach is crucial in both ensuring the legitimacy of Jamaicas NDC to domestic constituents and in enhancing the credibility of the international process governing emission reductions.

As a small island developing state, Jamaica is acutely aware of how the physical risks of climate change threaten its development and the wellbeing and economic security of its citizens.

Adaptation represents an important cross-cutting element for all sectors. Within the energy and land-use sectors, the policies in place to reduce emissions will also provide adaptation co- benefits to Jamaica and therefore enhance the countrys resilience. For example, a shift to cleaner energy in the energy sector will reduce local air pollution and therefore benefit human health. This problem will otherwise be more severe as temperatures increase. Similarly, the preservation of the forest cover will improve water, soil and air quality, and reduce soil erosion.

All relevant GHG gases were accounted for using the IPCC 2006 Guidelines for the National Greenhouse Gas Inventories and IPCC 2013 Wetlands Supplement.

Jamaica has opted to update its NDC in the information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding (ICTU) guidance template made available following discussions that framed the Katowice Rulebook at the twenty-fourth meeting of the Conference of Parties (COP 24).

Moving forward, Jamaica is committed to delivering on this NDC in keeping with its commitments as a Party to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement. Jamaica welcomes the support of the international community as the country pursues these ambitious goals to consolidate its efforts to delink economic growth and development from emissions growth, while also making itself more climate-resilient.

UPDATE OF NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION (NDC) OF JAMAICA (BASED ON THE ICTU GUIDANCE) 1. Quantified information on the reference point, including, as appropriate, a base year a Reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s) The target is not expressed relative to a base year. The reference year for the target is 2030 and the target is expressed relative to business-as-usual emissions in this year. Business-as-usual emissions have been calculated based on policies in place in 2005.

b. Quantifiable information on the reference indicators, their values in the reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s), and, as applicable, in the target year  Business-as-usual emissions related to land use change and forestry sector in 2030: -1.0MtCO2e c. For strategies, plans and actions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement, or polices and measures as components of nationally determined contributions where paragraph 1(b) above is not applicable, Parties to provide other relevant information extended to cover the domestic manufacture of these items as well. The ban is complemented by a Plastic Waste Minimisation project.

In addition, the country is currently developing proposals for a country- wide Integrated Waste Management (IWM) PPP concession which is expected to improve the management and reduce the emissions of the waste sector.

The country is also undertaking a range of pilot projects to explore biodiesel from cooking oil, the production of biogas using animal waste and increasing the use of biodigestors.

d. Target relative to the reference indicator, expressed numerically, for example in percentage or amount of reduction  25.4% reduction relative to business-as-usual emissions in 2030 without international support (unconditional)  28.5% reduction relative to business-as-usual emissions in 2030 conditional upon international support The source data is that reported in Jamaicas Third National Communication and 2018 Jamaica Integrated Resource Plan: A 20 Year Roadmap to Sustain and Enable Jamaicas Electricity Future. Jamaicas 2013 Land Use Change Assessment (LUCA) and National Forest Inventory Report were used to estimate current forest cover and type.

f. Information on the circumstances under which the Party may update the values of the reference indicators Jamaica may update the reference indicator to account for technical changes (e.g. changes in fuel prices, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) projections or any errors uncovered in the future) at the point of its next NDC submission. This approach has also been taken in this NDC with the business-as- usual emissions in the energy sector being reduced relative to those projected in Jamaicas first NDC. The first NDC had business-as-usual energy emissions in 2030 of 14.5MtCO2e whereas in the new baseline the comparable (energy sector) emissions are 8.2MtCO2e.

a. Time frame and/or period for implementation, including start and end date, consistent with any further relevant decision adopted by the CMA;

Jamaica has already begun implementing the actions and activities needed to meet this commitment. It will continue to do so in the period through to 2030.

b. Whether it is a single-year or multi-year target, as applicable.

a. General description of the target;

Jamaicas target to reduce emissions relative to business-as-usual by 2030, covers the energy sector (supply and end-use) and land-use change and forestry. The inclusion of the land use change and forestry is a new addition to Jamaicas NDC.

b. Sectors, gases, categories and pools covered by the nationally determined contribution, including, as applicable, consistent with IPCC guidelines;

Energy sector:  Carbon dioxide (CO2)  Methane (CH4)  Nitrous Oxide (N20)  Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) c. How the Party has taken into consideration paragraphs 31(c) and (d) of decision 1/CP.21;

Jamaica is committed over time to extending the scope of the coverage of its NDC to all categories of anthropogenic emissions in line with paragraph 31(c). In this update, emissions related to land use change and forestry were included along with the energy sector in this NDC. Jamaica conducted a detailed assessment to determine whether other sources and sinks of emissions could be included within its updated NDC but concluded that the data needed to rigorously assess the impact of policies and actions on emissions in other sectors was not available. Efforts will be made to address these data gaps over time with the support of national, regional and international partners.

d. Mitigation co-benefits resulting from Parties adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans, including description of specific projects, measures and initiatives of Parties adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans.

a. Information on the planning processes that the Party undertook to prepare its NDC and, if available, on the Partys implementation plans, including, as appropriate:

The Climate Change Division of the Ministry of Economic Growth and Job Creation coordinated a highly participatory process with public and private sector stakeholders related to all key emission-intensive sectors in the economy. The purpose of these consultations was to curate the actual and planned strategies, policies and initiatives of relevance to the emissions profile of the country, as well as to understand the data sources that could support the development of the NDC. In total, representatives from more than ten (10) Ministries, Departments and Agencies of government along with International Development Partners, private sector entities and civil society were engaged at all levels for a period of over twelve 12 months at different stages of the development of the NDC.

i. Domestic institutional arrangements, public participation and engagement with local communities and indigenous peoples, in a gender-responsive manner;

ii. Contextual matters, including, inter alia, as appropriate:

a. National circumstances, such as geography, climate, economy, sustainable development, and poverty eradication;

2 See Jamaica Voluntary National Review Report on the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (2018). 3 See Jamaica Survey of Living Conditions (2017) forest resources and the implementation of adaptation measures. Jamaica aims to move towards the eradication of poverty while simultaneously contributing to reducing global emissions.

b. Best practices and experience related to the preparation of the NDC;

A key feature of Jamaicas approach to determining its NDC is that it is based on policies, initiatives, and commitments that the country has already made. This approach - by focusing on activities where there is political support and which, in many cases, benefit from existing implementation plans  serves to make its NDC robust. This approach helps ensure the legitimacy of Jamaicas NDC to domestic constituents and enhances the credibility of the international process governing emission reductions.

c. Other contextual aspirations and priorities acknowledged when joining the Paris Agreement;

A commitment to reducing GHG emission levels nationally will require cleaner technologies, expertise and financing. Technology: The need for new innovations are embedded in the need to be more efficient and to produce from cleaner technologies. The availability and transfer of technologies that are environmentally sound and which support low carbon and climate-resilient development is paramount. As a small island developing state these opportunities are not often readily accessible and so the spirit of the Paris Agreement would help to foster North-South Cooperation. Expertise: The integration and transformation of new ideas and technologies into the economy, society and environment will take some capacity development for their appropriate applicability and proliferation. Financing: Technology transfer and capacity development cannot take place without sufficient financial resources made available to undertake the transition. As an indebted and highly vulnerable state to the impact of climate change, it is important to find the right balance in building the countrys resilience and in implementing the necessary adaptation and mitigation measures, while supporting the day to day needs of the country. The measures necessary to effect the transition are cost-intensive.

b. Specific information applicable to Parties, including regional economic integration organizations and their member States, that have reached an agreement to act jointly under Article 4, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement, including the Parties that agreed to act jointly and the terms of the agreement, in accordance with Article 4, paragraphs 1618, of the Paris Agreement;

Jamaica is not part of an agreement to act jointly under Article 4 of the Paris Agreement.

c. How the Partys preparation of its NDC has been informed by the outcomes of the global stocktake, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreement; The first global stocktake will take place in 2023. Jamaica participated in the Talanoa Dialogue in 2018, which generated political momentum for enhanced climate action, including calling for Parties to update their NDCs. Reflecting this momentum, Jamaicas new NDC is more ambitious than its previous one, both in terms of its sectoral coverage (the inclusion of land use change and forestry emissions) and in terms of a commitment to deeper emission reductions in the energy sector. By 2030, emissions covered by the NDC will be 1.8 to 2.0 MtCO2e lower than under a BAU scenario. These reductions relative to business-as-usual (BAU) in 2030 compare with a range of 1.1 to 1.5 MtCO2e in Jamaicas previous NDC.

d. Each Party with an NDC under Article 4 of the Paris Agreement that consists of adaptation action and/or economic diversification plans resulting in mitigation co-benefits consistent with Article 4, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement to submit information on:

i. How the economic and social consequences of response measures have been considered in developing the NDC;

ii. Specific projects, measures and activities to be implemented to contribute to mitigation co-benefits, including information on adaptation plans that also yield mitigation co-benefits, which may cover, but are not limited to, key sectors, such as energy, resources, water resources, coastal resources, human settlements and urban planning, agriculture and forestry; and economic diversification actions, which may cover, but are not limited to, sectors such as manufacturing and industry, energy and mining, transport and communication, construction, tourism, real estate, agriculture and fisheries.

5. Assumptions and methodological approaches, including those for estimating and accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and, as appropriate, removals:

a. Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals corresponding to the Partys nationally determined contribution, consistent with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 31, and accounting guidance adopted by the CMA;

Jamaica will account for its anthropogenic GHG emissions and removals using the 2006 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, IPCC Good Practice Guidance and Uncertainty Management in National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. The 2013 Supplement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for the National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Wetlands (IPCC 2013 Wetlands Supplement) was also utilized.

b. Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for the implementation of policies and measures or strategies in the nationally determined contribution;

See 5(a) above. Jamaica will also apply specific assumptions and methodologies, where relevant, when accounting for the progress of various policies and measures in its Biennial Update Report or Biennial Transparency Report.

c. If applicable, information on how the Party will take into account existing methods and guidance under the Convention to account for anthropogenic emissions and removals, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 14, of the Paris Agreement, as appropriate;

See 5(a) above.

d. IPCC methodologies and metrics used for estimating anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals;

Jamaicas emissions for CO2, CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs, SF6 and NF3 will be derived using the 2006 IPCC Guidelines and the IPCC 2013 Wetland supplement. The tier of methodology used will depend on the data that is available in different sectors.

The aggregation of GHG emissions have been estimated, and will be reported, using the 100-year time-horizon global warming potential values from the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report.

e. Sector-, category- or activity-specific assumptions, methodologies and approaches consistent with IPCC guidance, as appropriate, including, as applicable:

i. Approach to addressing emissions and subsequent removals from natural disturbances on managed lands;

GHG emissions and removals from natural disturbances, if any, will be accounted for in accordance with the prescribed 2006 IPCC Guidelines, coupled with field inventory measurements where applicable. No allowance was made for natural disturbances within the NDC.

ii. Approach used to account for emissions and removals from harvested wood products;

Due to the limited scale of harvested wood products in Jamaica these were not included when developing the NDC.

iii. Approach used to address the effects of age-class structure in forests;

Jamaica estimates GHG emissions and removals in the LUCF sector, using the maximum tier for which data is available. It will apply country- specific data resulting from field inventory measurements undertaken at regular intervals and estimated by modelling approaches. The field measurements will take into consideration tree growth information across the range of tree species and diameter classes for all forest types. The NDC used historical planting and removal data to estimate the age distribution of existing forest cover and applied the appropriate emissions factors from the IPCC.

f. Other assumptions and methodological approaches used for understanding the nationally determined contribution and, if applicable, estimating corresponding emissions and removals, including:

i. How the reference indicators, baseline(s) and/or reference level(s), including, where applicable, sector-, category- or activity- specific reference levels, are constructed, including, for example, key parameters, assumptions, definitions, methodologies, data sources and models used;

The baseline for assessing emission reduction from land use change and forestry was determined using Jamaicas 2013 Land Use Change Assessment. Projections for land-use change for the period to 2030 in the baseline take account of the historical trends reported in this document as well as Jamaicas agricultural production targets as set out in Vision 2030 Jamaica. The analysis then calculates how land-use patterns will change as a result of key policies (no net loss of forest cover, tree planting). Changes in land use are then aligned with emissions factors from the IPCCs Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories to estimate the implications these changes have for both emissions and removals. The baseline emissions in the energy sector were calculated using the Long-range Energy Alternatives Planning System (LEAP) model. This combines demographic and economic growth projections from the Statistical Institute of Jamaica, the UN World Population Prospects and the World Bank, to develop a business-as-usual forecast for energy sectors emissions given the policies that were in place in Jamaica as of 2005. GDP is assumed to grow at around 2% per annum between 2019 and 2030, based on IMF projections. Gradual population growth is also expected, from 2.7m in 2018 to 2.8m in 2030, based on historical data from the Statistical Institute of Jamaica and projections from the UN.

ii. For Parties with nationally determined contributions that contain non- greenhouse-gas components, information on assumptions and methodological approaches used in relation to those components, as applicable;

iii. For climate forcers included in nationally determined contributions not covered by IPCC guidelines, information on how the climate forcers are estimated;

iv. Further technical information, as necessary;

g. The intention to use voluntary cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, if applicable.

Jamaica is committed to contributing to discussions on international cooperation through Article 6 of the Paris Agreement. Depending on the outcome of these negotiations, the country will explore how it can use these mechanisms either to support the achievement of its own NDC or to provide additional mitigation outcomes to support NDC attainment by other countries.

6. How the Party considers that its NDC is fair and ambitious in light of its national circumstances a. How the Party considers that its NDC is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances; Jamaicas updated NDC reflects its strong commitment to the implementation of the Paris Agreement. It will be subject to all relevant laws, guidelines, policies and programmes which are designed to increase inclusiveness and fairness, including the Code of Consultations and the National Policy for Gender Equity. As set out below, the updated NDC is considerably more ambitious than its first. Despite being a developing country and a SIDS, under this NDC, and given current expectations, within the covered sectors, Jamaica will move closer to decoupling economic growth from its emissions profile. Over the ten years between 2020 and 2030, emissions are projected to only grow very slightly within the sectors covered by its NDC, despite expected continued growth of the economy. The countrys emissions per capita will remain substantially lower than the global average.

b. Fairness considerations, including reflecting on equity;

c. How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 3, of the Paris Agreement;

Jamaicas revised NDC represents a significant enhancement on its first NDC. Jamaica is taking steps to move towards an economy-wide target and has brought emissions from the land use change and forestry sector within its NDC for the first time. This reflects the importance of the forestry sector to Jamaica, which accounts for more than half of the islands total land use, and the important commitments that the country has made to preserve and enhance these stocks.

The country has also identified opportunities to deepen the emission reductions it delivers in the energy sector. These opportunities are part of an increasingly comprehensive approach to decarbonising this sector that covers both the electricity generation, as well as energy use sub- sectors. The result of these positive changes is that Jamaicas latest NDC will approximately double in ambition. By 2030, the emission reductions in d. How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement;

e. How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement.

Jamaica has also prepared its NDC following ICTU guidance to provide information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding.

7. How the NDC contributes towards achieving the objectives of the Convention as set out in its Article 2 a. How the NDC contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2; In 2015, Jamaicas per capita GHG emissions were just 3.6 tCO2e per person, fully 45% below the global average of 6.6 tCO2e. Despite this low starting point, the country is now proposing an NDC that, under current projections, is consistent with virtually decoupling its economic growth from its covered emissions. As such, despite being a developing country, Jamaica is playing its part in global emissions peaking as soon as possible, as set out under Article 4.1 of the Paris Agreement.

b. How the NDC contributes towards Article 2, paragraph 1(a), and Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Paris Agreement.

