Pursuant to Article 4 of the Paris Agreement, Vanuatus Revised and Enhanced Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) reflects highest-level ambitions on adaptation, mitigation, and loss and damage.

The Government of Vanuatu would like to acknowledge the support towards this NDC by the NDC Support Programme enabled by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the German Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation, Nuclear Safety and Consumer Protection (BMU), the German Federal Ministry of Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ), the European Union and the Government of Spain, the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme and the Government of Ireland, as well as the Enhancing Vanuatus NDC to include quantifiable adaptation targets project enabled by Deutsche Gesellschaft fr Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) and the Regional Pacific Nationally Determined Contributions Hub.

Special thanks to the Vanuatu NDC Enhancement Committee, which oversaw the revision and increased ambition in Vanuatus commitments in 2021, comprising Mr. Mike Waiwai, Director, Department of Climate Change; Ms. Florence Iautu, Strategic Manager, National Advisory Board on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction; Mr. Nelson Kalo, Mitigation Officer, Department of Climate Change; Ms. Pauliane Basil, Adaptation Officer, Department of Climate Change; Ms. Anne- Marie Robert, Climate Finance Officer, Department of Climate Change; Ms. Diana Hinge, Climate Finance Advisor, National Advisory Board on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction; Mr Ian Iercet, NDC Coordinator Mitigation, Department of Climate Change; and Ms. Leana William, MEA Officer, National Advisory Board on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction.

The Minister of Climate Change, Honourable Silas Bule Melve, and the Director General, Mrs. Esline Garaebiti, continue to provide critical leadership to elevate and oversee implementation of Vanuatus climate commitments.

Many technical experts and consultants enabled the compilation of this document, including Dr. Christopher Bartlett, Dr. Srikanth Subbarao, Mr. Naveen Pawar, Dr. Melanie Pill, Dr Patrina Dumaru, Mr. Malcolm Dalesa and Mr. Tom Sloan.

This enhanced NDC would not be possible without the incredible commitment and action of Vanuatus line agencies and sectors and the members of the National Advisory Board on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction, who are the engine room behind the nations aspirations towards resilience.

Vanuatu submits this updated and enhanced nationally determined contribution (NDC), in which our political leaders, technical experts and civil society have considered how our nation can move to a global net-zero greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions society (Article 4.1) whilst being resilient to the unavoidable impacts of climate change (Article 7.1), minimising, averting and addressing loss and damage (Article 8) in the context of the long-term temperature goal (Article 2), while determining our financial needs (Article 9) that shall be provided by developed country Parties in continuation of their existing obligations under the UNFCCC.

Vanuatu is already a carbon-negative country. With forests covering 70% of its islands, and its maritime jurisdiction comprising 98% of the nation, the big ocean state of Vanuatu is already a carbon sink - absorbing more carbon dioxide than it produces - thus freely providing a critical environmental service to carbon emitting countries around the world. Moving beyond our current Net Zero status, this NDC recommits Vanuatu to rapidly phasing out fossil fuels, deeply decarbonising and transitioning completely to a circular economy.

Pursuant to Article 4 of the Paris Agreement, and to demonstrate that Vanuatu is an action-focused leader in its calls for all Parties to make ambitious commitments to limit the global average temperature increase to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, Vanuatus NDC reflects the highest ambitions on adaptation, mitigation, and loss and damage. As per Decision 4/CMA.1, Vanuatus information provides clarity, transparency and understanding.

This updated and enhanced NDC contains 20 Mitigation commitments, 116 Adaptation commitments, 12 Loss & Damage commitments and is based on the ambitions, policies and workplans of Vanuatu's frontline sector agencies.

Targets and commitments are conditional upon international finance, action, support, technology and capacity development. The approximate conditional cost of achieving Vanuatus Revised and Enhanced NDC is USD 1,214,350,000.

Vanuatus Science-Based Commitments The international climate regime, including the UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement, is built upon a clear understanding of the threats posed by, and the causes of, climate change. More than a century and a half of industrialisation, along with the clear-felling of forests and certain farming methods, has led to increased quantities of greenhouse gases (GHGs) in the atmosphere.

The Paris Agreement set out a global commitment to limiting warming to well below 2C while pursuing efforts to limit global temperature rise to 1.5C. Vanuatu bases its nationally determined commitments on the best available science, which confirms the existential nature of the current climate crisis and the urgency with which we, and all nations, must act.

The Republic of Vanuatu signed the Paris Agreement on 22 April 2016 and deposited its instrument of ratification on 21 September 2016. The Government of the Republic of Vanuatu is fully committed to effective and transparent implementation of the Agreement and submitted its declaration, which reads, in part:

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change estimates that to limit global warming to 1.5C, global emissions need to be roughly halved by around 2030 (compared to 2018) and reach net zero around 2050. Net zero refers to the situation in which emissions reduce to almost zero, and any remaining emissions are removed from the atmosphere.

The IPCC AR6 report suggests that under all scenarios examined, Earth is likely to reach the crucial 1.5 warming limit in the early 2030s unless deep cuts are made to CO2 and other greenhouse gas emissions. Climate change and its consequences are already being felt. Beyond 1.5, the situation will rapidly deteriorate.. This expected increase of the global mean temperature is associated with rising sea levels, rapidly changing ecosystems and more extreme and slow-onset events such as heat waves, storms and flooding. The impacts undermine global efforts for development and prosperity everywhere, and particularly in small island developing states like Vanuatu.

Long Term Vision on Climate Change The Republic of Vanuatus long term vision on climate change and aspirations are embedded within the fundamental duties defined under its constitution: to protect the Republic of Vanuatu and to safeguard the national wealth, resources and environment in the interests of the present generation and of future generations and guided by its National Vision - A stable, sustainable and prosperous Vanuatu, under the National Sustainable Development Plan (NSDP) 20162030 also called Vanuatu 2030: The Peoples Plan.

The Republic of Vanuatus long-term climate action vision is governed by the Vanuatu Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy 2016-2030 (CCDRR Policy  to promote good governance and establishes priorities and strategies for future climate actions; and Meteorology, Geological Hazards and Climate Change Act No. 25 of 2016 (Climate Change Act), that provides institutions (governance and administrative provisions), transparency and roles and responsibility for departments of meteorology, geological hazards and climate change and for related purposes.

In May 2022, the Parliament of the Republic of Vanuatu Declared a Climate Emergency, reaffirming that climate change is the single greatest threat to the livelihoods, security, and wellbeing of the peoples of Vanuatu, and decided to:

a. Respond to the climate emergency in ways that emphasize equity, self-determination, culture, tradition, democracy, and the protection of fundamental human rights.

b. Submit a new and enhanced Nationally Determined Contribution which demonstrates global highest levels of ambition with targets on Vanuatus sector priorities in adaptation and loss & damage.

c. Pursue all suitable avenues under international and domestic law to prevent harm resulting from climate change, including protecting the rights of present and future generations, including, by seeking an Advisory Opinion from the International Court of Justice on the obligations of States under international law to protect the rights of present and future generations against the adverse effects of climate change.

d. Further engage the public and civil society in climate-emergency and climate justice related deliberations.

NDC Enhancement Pursuant to Articles 4.2 and 4.11 of the PA and Decision 1/CP.21 paragraph 23, the Republic of Vanuatu, taking into account its national circumstances and capabilities, hereby communicates its revised and further enhanced Nationally Determined Contribution under the agreement for 20212030. The Government of the Republic of Vanuatu notes with great concern that the objective of the agreement can only be achieved by intensifying the level of action significantly, complemented by international support, to achieve conditional contributions, as reflected in the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC).

In that spirit, the Republic of Vanuatu presents its enhanced NDC for 20212030 and calls on all Parties to increase their ambitions in line with the best available and most recent science and obligations under the Agreement.

Vanuatus INDC 2016 (Mitigation) Vanuatu submitted its initial NDC to the UNFCCC on 21st September 2016. The main mitigation contribution under the initial submission was to achieve the outcomes and targets under the National Energy Road Map (NERM) and Second National Communication (SNC) extended to 2030. The mitigation contribution for the Vanuatu INDC submission was a sector specific target of transitioning to close to 100% renewable energy in the electricity sector by 2030. This target would replace nearly all fossil fuel requirements for electricity generation in the country and be consistent with the National Energy Road Map (NERM) target of 65% renewable energy by 2020. This contribution would reduce emissions in the energy sector by 72Gg by 2030. Emissions in this sector were around 130 Gg in 2010 but are expected to rise to 240 Gg by 2030 (3% per annum). Vanuatus INDC mitigation contribution would thus reduce business as usual (BAU) emissions in the electricity sub-sector by 100% and in the energy sector by 30%. The target was conditional, depending on funding commensurate with putting the transition in place being made available from external sources. In addition, the transition to renewable energy-based electricity could be accelerated through the review of agricultural (coconut oil sector) national policy. Opportunities for reducing the high emissions levels in agriculture were to be simultaneously pursued through cooperative programmes with nations having similarly high emissions in this sector. The forestry sector mitigation was to be treated as part of the existing REDD+ programme. The Government was also aware that waste management required further attention.

Type Activity-based mitigation targets, sectoral and policy targets in key sectors, including emissions reduction in some sub-sectors. The GHG emission reduction targets in this section are all conditional upon international support (financial and technical support) made available.

Coverage Energy; Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU); and Waste.

Timeframe From 1 January 2021  31 December 2030. Single year target: 2030, including updates on 2025 targets.

M1 By 2030, Renewable Energy Capacity Addition and substituting (replacement) of fossil fuels with Coconut (Copra) Oil based Electricity Generation: transitioning to close to 100% renewable energy in the electricity generation sector.

Transport M2 By 2030, 10% improvement in transport (land and marine) energy efficiency.

M3 Electric Vehicles (e-mobility): by 2030, (a) Introduce e-buses for public transportation (10% of total public buses); (b) Introduce e-cars in Vanuatu (10% of government fleet); and (c) 1000 electric two wheelers (e-bikes)/three wheelers (e-rickshaw).

M4 By 2030, 20 % bio-diesel (bio-fuel) blending in diesel.

M5 By 2030, Mileage and Emission Standards for Vehicles.

M6 By 2030, (a) 100% electricity access by households in off- grid areas; (b) 100% electricity access by public institutions (on- and off- grid); (c) 13% electricity sector end- use efficiency; (d) 14% improve biomass end use (improved cook stoves and drying) efficiency; (e) 65% renewable electricity use by rural tourism bungalows.

These three energy sub- sector targets collectively can reduce GHG emissions approximately 78.786 Gg CO2e from energy sector compared to business as usual (BAU) scenario in 2030, which is around 40% reduction in comparison to energy sectors GHG emissions from the BAU scenario.

M7 By 2030, installation of 1000 Biogas Plants for Commercial and Residential Use.

M8 By 2030, Increase Energy Efficiency in Commercial and Residential Sector, (a) 5% increase in Energy Efficiency in Commercial and Residential Sector; and (b) 10 Numbers of Energy Efficient Building (Green Building).

These three energy sub- sector targets collectively can reduce GHG emissions approximately 78.786 Gg CO2e from energy sector compared to business as usual (BAU) scenario in 2030, which is around 40% reduction in comparison to energy sectors GHG emissions from the BAU scenario.

Tourism M9 By 2030, Increase Ecotourism Supported by Local Communities.

M10 By 2030, Training and capacity building for livestock farming and pasture management.

The impact of above mitigation measures in livestock sub-sectors net GHG emissions reduction of about 30.977 Gg CO2eq in 2030; which is around 9% less than the GHG emissions in BAU scenario. It is to be noted that actual GHG mitigation potentials of the above measures are not estimated due to lack of data and defined methodology. However, the cumulative impact of these measures will result in higher than the estimated GHG emissions reductions.

M11 By 2030, Converting Pastures to Silvo-pastural Livestock Systems.

M12 By 2030, International Collaboration to Improve Livestock Efficiency.

M13 In 2030, the forestry sector in Vanuatu remains a net carbon sink.

Vanuatu is committed to maintaining its forest cover and is expected to remain net carbon negative in future. The REDD+ programme is being implemented in Vanuatu to improve sustainable forest management practices.

No specific mitigation NDC actions identified for forestry sub-sector as the measures to reduce deforestation and promote good land care to accepted mitigation practices are still under development under the REDD+ initiative. Based on the results and outcome from the REDD+ initiative, potential mitigation interventions shall be included in future NDC updates.

M14 In 2030, sustainable logging practices will continue to be practiced in Vanuatu for commercial logging.

M15 By 2030, Implement Waste to Energy Plant for Municipal Solid Waste (MSW): (a) Waste to Energy Plant for Port Villa; (b) Waste to Energy Plant for Luganville; and (c) Waste to Energy Plant for Lenakel. With the waste sector mitigation measures, the waste sectors net GHG emissions will reduce about 29.335 Gg in 2030 in comparison to BAU scenario; which is 56% less than the BAU scenario GHG emissions. It is to be noted that GHG mitigation potentials for some of the measures identified for the waste sector are not estimated due to lack of data or methodology. However, the cumulative impact of the additional measures will result in higher GHG emissions reductions from waste sector.

M16 By 2030, Introduce Composting for municipal organic waste to produce soil enhancer.

M17 By 2030, Implement Collect, Sort and Export of Recyclable Materials (first phase) for Port Vila.

M18 By 2030, Develop and Implement National Plastics Strategy.

Wastewater M19 By 2030, Implement Wastewater Management System in Vanuatu: (a) Centralised Wastewater collection and treatment system in municipal area including awareness and capacity building.

M20 By 2030, Improvements to Public and Communal Toilet Facilities including Bio-Toilets.

Vanuatu Enhanced NDC (Adaptation) Vanuatu has prioritised transformative adaptation action in its National Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy, with a strategic goal of resilient development, including implementing activities that enable Vanuatu to absorb and quickly bounce back from climate shocks and stresses.

The following Adaptation Targets have been defined in an inclusive, participatory and decentralised way by the sectors that are themselves implementing and planning for a resilient future. For each target, the specific policy reference is provided, as well as the link to Vanuatus National Sustainable Development Plan (NSDP), the most relevant Global Sustainable Development Goal (SGD), the level of conditionality of finance required from developed country Parties, and the overall financial envelope to successfully meet the target by 2030.

Sixty per cent (60%) of Vanuatus population relies on agriculture as the basis of household incomes and livelihoods, and it accounts for around 23% of GDP. Much agriculture activity is micro-scale subsistence, for household consumption or sale at local markets, and dependent on rainfall, making the sector extremely vulnerable to climate impacts, loss and damage. Adaptation in the agriculture sector is one of the governments highest priorities, with a goal of agricultures ability to support household income and food needs in a changing climate.

A1 Vanuatu commits to mainstream climate variability, climate change and disaster risk reduction using adaptation and mitigation strategies in all agriculture initiatives and developments (Agriculture Sector Policy 12.1), including provide adequate funding for activities to address climate change (VASP 12.1.4).

A2 Vanuatu commits to formulating climate and disaster preparedness plans for the productive sector.

A3 Vanuatu commits to implementing measures for enhancing the resilience of subsistence agriculture in all six provinces by 2030 (NDC Adaptation Target Ag2).

A4 Vanuatu commits to enhancing traditional agricultural practices, focusing on disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation.

A5 Vanuatu commits to ensuring that by 2030 at least 30% of producers have undergone Agro-Meteorology training.

A6 Vanuatu commits to improve access to appropriate technology, knowledge and skills in food production (NSDP ENV 1.4), and ensuring that at least 5% of all training conducted by Government and NGOs will cover food preservation and storage (NSDP SMART Indicator ENV 1.4.2).

A7 Vanuatu commits to providing subsidies for small-scale primary producers (agriculture, livestock, forestry and fisheries) and exploring other small-grant and soft loan options to make these livelihood activities more resilient and recover from climate loss and damage, especially through partnerships with the private sector, international organisations, development partners and NGOs.

A8 Vanuatu commits to scale up Climate Information Services initiatives for producers so they can better understand the impacts of climate change and variability on food production, farming practices and markets.

A9 Vanuatu commits to increase access of farmers and enterprises to agricultural and climate financing (including risk sharing and insurance services).

A10 Vanuatu commits to upscaling climate-smart management practices in the fruit and vegetable sector.

A11 Vanuatu commits to establish effective governance systems for managing climate-proofed fruit and vegetable market centres at the municipality and provincial levels.

A12 Vanuatu commits to conduct training on climate-proofed fruit and vegetable nursery infrastructure.

A13 Vanuatu commits to identify, increase and enhance importation of fruit and vegetable cultivars and rootstocks with high tolerance to climate change stresses.

A14 Vanuatu commits to develop a national fruit and vegetable contingency plan with specific actions aimed at assisting policy makers and farmers in minimising costs incurred during climate extremes.

A15 Vanuatu commits to encourage the use of improved genetic varieties of fruits and vegetables suited for climate extreme conditions.

A16 Vanuatu commits to create a national fruit and vegetable support and recovery fund to be used for supporting farmers and growers during extreme climatic conditions and disasters.

A17 Vanuatu commits to incorporate climate change and environmental issues into coconut industry development.

A18 Vanuatu commits to train farmers on the advantages and benefits of using nursery grown kava planting materials for climate resilience.

In the context of a changing climate, Vanuatu must continue to protect its borders against the introduction and spread of foreign pests and diseases that could affect crops, animals, humans and the environment, and, to enhance trade of Vanuatus products. Biosecurity is crucial to maintain good health, wellbeing and progress in the life of our climate resilient community. The increased impact of pest damage to crops and the environment due to climate change poses a great threat to the livelihood of Vanuatu citizens.

A19 Vanuatu commits to a collaborative effort against damage caused by pests and diseases due to favourable climatic conditions as a result of climate change (Biosecurity Policy TA 15), specifically by entering into formal agreements between Biosecurity Vanuatu and climate change organisations (local, regional and international) (Biosecurity Policy D 2b).

10 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 Vanuatu recognises the severe adverse impacts of climate change on Vanuatu fisheries and marine ecosystems and the need for the fisheries sector to urgently adapt and address the loss and damage from climate-related disasters. 61% of households in Vanuatu regularly go fishing. The direct and indirect effects of climate change are expected to reduce the productivity of coastal fisheries in Vanuatu by 20 50% by 2100.

A20 Vanuatu commits to strengthen community- based fisheries management and climate adaptation, including preserving traditional resource management and fishing practices (National Fisheries Policy SA 25), ensuring that 40 integrated coastal management plans developed and implemented by 2030 (NSDP SMART Indicator ENV 4.4.2) A21 Vanuatu commits to improve access to appropriate adaptation technology, knowledge and skills in fisheries food production (NSDP ENV 1.4), and ensuring that by 2030, there are 100 FADs distributed throughout Vanuatu (NSDP SMART Indicator ENV 1.4.1).

A22 Vanuatu commits to regularly monitor and evaluate the state of coastal fisheries including to develop and implement procedures for climate change monitoring and impact assessment protocols.

Impacts of climate change on the people and forests of Vanuatu are diverse and cross-sectoral, including inundation of forested land in low-lying areas, increased incidence of pests and diseases, prolonged periods of drought and flood conditions, increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events, salinisation of forested land close to the coasts and the penetration of saltwater into the subterranean freshwater resources, adversely affecting forests and trees. Changing temperature and precipitation regimes are influencing the productivity of forested land and require the adaptation or introduction of new trees and silvicultural production systems. The combined impacts of climate change, population growth and soil fertility declines will exert a growing and cumulative pressure on the remaining lowland forests of Vanuatu to be converted to agricultural land. On the other hand, Vanuatus forests offer opportunities for climate change mitigation through carbon conservation (SFM, protected areas, reducing of deforestation and forest degradation), carbon sequestration (afforestation and reforestation), and carbon substitution (replacement of carbon intensive products and fuels through wood products).

A23 Vanuatu commits to develop forestry-related climate change adaptation demonstration projects including concerns for food security, soil stabilisation, water management, and coastal erosion.

A24 Vanuatu commits to introduce and promote climate change-resilient tree species and varieties.

A25 Vanuatu commits to maintain and enhance food security through agroforestry systems.

A26 Vanuatu commits to undertake ground cover initiatives to prevent soil and coastal erosion.

A27 Vanuatu commits to systematically assess and continuously monitor the impacts of climate change on forest systems (i.e. through PSPs permanent sample plots).

A28 Vanuatu commits to minimise wind damage to crops and infrastructure by trialling windbreak species and systems.

A29 Vanuatu commits to establish and manage buffer zones around climate sensitive ecosystems, and undertake enrichment planting within these areas.

A30 Vanuatu commits to conserve, protect and sustainably manage mangrove forests and mangrove ecosystems, wetlands, and shoreline trees especially as a measure to enhance resilience to the impacts of climate change.

12 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 A31 Vanuatu commits to apply sustainable forest management concepts to reduce forest degradation and thus GHG emissions and to maintain healthy forest ecosystems to enhance resilience against the negative impacts of climate change.

A32 Vanuatu commits to promote and enable farmer and community-based afforestation and reforestation programme for climate change adaptation.

A33 Vanuatu commits to hold regular meetings or REDD+ programmes with officials from across government departments, NGOs and private sector, including training and workshops to raise the capacity of relevant stakeholders.

A34 Vanuatu commits to undertake cost benefit analyses and studies to better understand degradation dynamics and forest landscape restoration needs.

A35 Vanuatu commits to develop a sustainable funding strategy for forest landscape restoration.

Vanuatu requires a livestock sector that is modern, sustainably managed to benefit all its stakeholders, contributes to greater socio-economic development, and ensures sound environmental and climate resilience practices. Despite successes on climate change adaptation, farmers do not yet have sufficient knowledge or skills on breeds, farming systems or other methods to cope with the negative impacts of climate change. All too often animals become the victim of environmental disasters and adverse climatic conditions.

A36 Vanuatu commits to promote No Regrets Development such that livestock related directives and strategies will not contribute to further climate change impacts or environmental degradation but rather facilitate adaptation, risk reduction and environmental integrity.

A37 Vanuatu commits to maintain a good balance between livestock farming and effective environmental management, including keeping farmers well informed about climate risk measures they may employ related to cyclones or ENSO events.

14 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 Vanuatu recognises that Climate Change vulnerability significantly impacts the safety, security and availability of water; and so aims to strengthen coordination with other sectors and partners to understand, predict, design and invest to secure Vanuatus water future. Currently, limited freshwater is available due to small water catchments. Some of the most profound impacts of climate variability and change will be felt in the water sector, particularly in water scarce areas and small islands that depend entirely on rainwater. In Vanuatu, both ground and surface water are used for domestic purposes. In urban areas the main water source is shallow aquifers whereas in rural areas various sources are used such as bores, wells, springs, rivers and rainwater catchments.

A38 Vanuatu commits to ensuring that all people have reliable access to safe drinking water.

A39 Vanuatu commits to strengthened climate risk management through mapping water resources (ground, surface, rain) and increase storage, giving priority to rain / ground water for drinking and surface water for agriculture and industry.

A40 Vanuatu commits to improved climate preparedness, response and recovery for the water sector: building on local knowledge to improve the protection of water supplies, strengthen response through improved data management and sharing knowledge to build back better after climate loss and damage events.

A41 Vanuatu commits to protect climate-vulnerable watersheds, catchments and freshwater resources, including community water sources (NSDP ENV 4.2), ensuring the declaration of 6 Water Protection Zones by 2030 (NDC Adaptation Target Wa2 & NSDP SMART Indicator ENV 4.2.1).

A42 Vanuatu commits that 60% of communities in the six provinces have developed drinking Water Safety and Security Plans (DWSSPs).

Vanuatu, like other countries in the region, faces a triple health burden: communicable diseases such as dengue, combined with increasing rates of non-communicable diseases and the effects of climate change. Vanuatu is vulnerable to climate change natural disasters which create public health emergencies, such as water and food contamination and other emerging diseases. Climate change related events will continue to threaten Vanuatu with the potential to impact on health service planning and delivery.

A43 Vanuatu commits to implement programmes that create, promote and protect a better environment and hygienic conditions to improve health, climate resilience, and wellbeing of the people of Vanuatu.

A44 Vanuatu commits to establish an Environmental Health Authority that will develop standards for all Vanuatu in the areas of clinical waste, food, water, solid waste management, housing, pollution, sanitation and port health.

A45 Vanuatu commits to develop and refine public health emergency procedures.

A46 Vanuatu commits to ensure that climate displaced people, people at risk of displacement, internal migrants, people living in informal settlements, communities relocating to new locations and host communities, have continued access to basic health and medical services, including post- sexual assault treatment and care relating to sexual and reproductive health and chronic illness, as well as nutrition advice and information.

16 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 The key challenge facing Vanuatu in the context of environmental management and development planning is climate change. Vanuatus diverse ecosystems are being threatened by climate change as are the livelihoods and wellbeing of the ni-Vanuatu people who rely on them for income and food. Ecosystems provide cost- effective adaptation services, and effective natural resource management can minimise the risks of climate change and disasters while enhancing livelihoods resilience. Vanuatus environmental goals include climate resilience and nature-based solutions to achieve a strong and resilient nation in the face of climate change and disaster risks. The focus of Vanuatus conservation efforts is on the needs and interests of people, including resilience to climate change. Climate change related loss of biodiversity affects the livelihoods of rural and urban populations. In Vanuatu, biodiversity is our food, our culture, our tradition, our money, our medicine, our shelter, our fresh air (oxygen), our firewood, our coastline stabiliser, our protector against storm surge, protector of our freshwater systems, our carbon sequestration sink and our ecosystem-based adaptation to climate change. Our biodiversity is vital for our survival.

A47 Vanuatu commits to prioritising development actions that minimise threats and incorporates climate solutions from the ridge to the reef of island communities (National CCDRR Policy 7.4.5), by strengthening local authorities and municipal planning authorities to enact and enforce land use planning laws and regulations (NEPIP PO2.2).

A48 Vanuatu commits to prioritising adaptation and risk reduction actions that build on, incorporate and protect taboos and conservation areas (National CCDRR Policy 7.4.5), including by officially registered 20 Community Conservation Areas (CCAs) by 2030 (NEPIP 1.2.1).

A49 Vanuatu commits to identifying and minimising negative impacts on the environment from proposed adaptation and risk reduction activities (National CCDRR Policy 7.4.5), ensuring that 90% of development projects comply with EIA requirements by 2030 (NEPIP 1.5.5).

A50 Vanuatu commits to quantifying the value and benefit of ecosystem services for resilience and building this into planning and budgeting (National CCDRR Policy 7.4.5), including adding questions about ecosystem services in national surveys (NEPIP 5.1.12).

A51 Vanuatu commits to developing advocacy and educational programmes around the value of ecosystem-based adaptation (National CCDRR Policy 7.4.5), including at least one model school in each province implementing environmental resilience programmes by 2030 (NSDP SMART Indicator ENV 5.5.1).

A52 Vanuatu commits to conserve at least 17% of important biodiversity areas, at least 30% of natural forest, at least 10% of wetland areas, and 10% of marine areas through effective community and government management measures by 2030.

Vanuatu is a Big Ocean State. Planning and management for use of marine resources, particularly living marine resources, must be able to respond to considerable climate uncertainty. Beyond planning for uncertainty, understanding the impacts and effects of climate change and other stressors, such as cyclones, coastal flooding, is also key to maintaining a healthy environment. This will influence how we use and value our coasts and seas both now and in the future. Adaptation of management, including in the marine environment, is necessary to deal with the potential impacts of these changes, many of which are already in train.

A53 Vanuatu commits to manage increasing climate risk of the whole marine area through the incorporation of appropriate adaptation and resilience-building strategies into sustainable development, conservation and governance actions at all levels.

A54 Vanuatu commits to adopt and implement National Disaster Prevention and Response Plans in relation to risk management in marine and coastal areas, accompanied by protection programmes (re-housing, protection and adaptation) for communities settled in high-risk areas on the coasts.

A55 Vanuatu commits to protect naturally resistant or resilient areas including coral reefs that still have high coral cover and mangroves and coastal wetlands which can migrate inland.

A56 Vanuatu commits to Integrate uncertainty into marine protected area planning, management and evaluation, for example, by replicating protection across space.

A57 Vanuatu commits to establish controls on the removal of beach sediment that contributes to coastal erosion and loss of protection.

A58 Vanuatu commits to apply adaptive management in coastal and marine areas, including working with traditional leaders, when implementing this policy.

18 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 Vanuatu has uniquely fragile marine, aquatic and terrestrial resources due to its size, lack of natural storage, competing land uses and vulnerability to climate change. Pollution due to settlements and other developments can have a significant impact on public health, quality of life, the environment and on economic development. The main types of pollutants threatening Vanuatu include increased loads of nutrients, sediments and pesticides in sewage and storm water runoff and in agricultural runoff. Climate change is putting further pressure on natural resources, threatening the long-term viability of communities and islands.

A59 Vanuatu commits to developing, for all 6 provincial governments, a Waste Management Plan by 2030.

A60 Vanuatu commits to ensuring at least two pollution guidelines/standards are in force by 2030.

A61 Vanuatu commits to Develop and deliver Training of Trainers (TOT) programme on waste management, pollution control and clean production.

A62 Vanuatu commits to develop and implement a waste minimisation plan (Including 3Rs, composting, characterisation, source separation) by 2030.

A63 Vanuatu commits to approving and installing at least 1 waste treatment and storage facility in each province.

Increasing access to ICTs for Vanuatu citizens is transforming government services and public administration, as well as supercharging advances in the socio-economic development of the nation and its resilience to climate change. While there are risks and downsides of the increased use of and dependence on ICTs, the country is working to empower users with tools and services, and enhancing relevance of ICTs by promoting the availability of local content and through capacity building programmes. ICTs unleash creative collaborations and climate-focused actions of various public and private entities, academia, civil society and the public in general, especially through online platforms for multi-stakeholder and multi-sector coordination and collaboration.

A64 Vanuatu commits to using ICTs in climate change mitigation and adaptation, ensuring that GoV planning and response agencies shall have potential to have free access to public and private network infrastructure and resources.

20 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 Infrastructure is the foundation for climate resilient development in urban and rural areas, operating industries and commerce, improving living standards, delivering community services and driving economic growth. Vanuatu has made substantial progress in providing infrastructure, and planning for further investment is underway in individual sub-sectors. However, the current stock of Government of Vanuatu (GoV) supported infrastructure assets remains compromised by climate change, despite recent climate proofing efforts, due primarily to inadequate resources for operation and maintenance once they are deployed. As climate extremes become more intense and change in frequency, there are ever more critical challenges for developing public infrastructure in Vanuatu, particularly in remote outer islands.

A65 Vanuatu commits to provide infrastructure services that contribute to inclusive (broad- based and gender-balanced) economic growth, human development, and poverty reduction, with increasing resilience to climate risks.

A66 Vanuatu commits to assessing, for all new government infrastructure investments, the Resilience of Project Assets to Climate Change and Natural Disaster Risk, and build to high climate change and disaster risk reduction standards, with backup, failover, low vulnerability location, etc.

A67 Vanuatu commits to ensuring that the design and construction of public and other major infrastructure and development projects consider current and projected risks to minimise loss and damage, especially by developing and adhering to climate-proofed building codes, environmental impact assessments, regulations and development guidelines.

Planning for disaster risk reduction and climate change resilience must include persons with disabilities at the national, provincial and community levels. Evidence from Vanuatu indicates that persons with disabilities experience greater risk in a disaster. They are less likely to evacuate safely and without injury due to a lack of accessible information regarding evacuation processes, and limited availability of accessible evacuation shelters. Persons with disabilities are not always included adequately in community or national disaster risk reduction planning and response processes or structures such as Community Disaster and Climate Change Committees, and Clusters.

A68 Vanuatu commits to support mainstreaming of the rights of persons with disabilities in all policies, plans and programmes across the climate change sector.

A69 Vanuatu commits to work with persons with disabilities to identify barriers to climate change initiatives.

A70 Vanuatu commits to strengthen the inclusion of organisations of persons with disabilities in national climate decision-making process involving planning and programme implementation which directly and indirectly affects their lives.

22 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 Climate vulnerability and its consequences not only reflect existing gender inequality, they also reinforce and exacerbate socially constructed relations of power, norms, and practices that constrain progress toward gender equality in Vanuatu. This includes culturally influenced gender roles and responsibilities that confine womens activities and mobility to the home; traditions that limit womens access to natural, financial, and social capital, and thus their ability to cope with climate shocks and to adapt to climate change; and norms that inhibit womens ability to access information, knowledge, skills, and capacity building that could be lifesaving during and after a weather-related disaster. As a result, women and girls in Vanuatu experience heightened social, economic, and health impacts of climate change. More women than men (49% and 41% respectively) are involved in the subsistence economy in Vanuatu, which makes them more susceptible to climate change, disasters and other livelihood stresses.

When age is added to considerations of gender - that is, if the focus is specifically on girls - there is another layer of vulnerability and impact through which climate change intersects. After climate events, adolescent girls are at additional risk of being pulled out of school to help alleviate extra domestic burdens, like fetching water, that are shouldered by women in households under climate-related stress. Leaving school also makes girls less likely to be informed about climate change and further increases their vulnerability. Such circumstances put into play the early onset of key life transitions, including early pregnancy, that function to direct girls into a cycle of intergenerational poverty, vulnerability, and marginalisation.

Despite the potential for exacerbated vulnerability, women and girls are highly impactful agents of change in Vanuatu, holding important traditional decision-making roles in their families, communities and schools. Women and girls have unique abilities as drivers of solutions when they are empowered, as men and women have different coping mechanisms, capacities and experiences in the face of climate change. Women and girls play an important role in climate change adaptation and mitigation because of their roles in core climate change sectors: agriculture, livestock management, energy, disaster risk reduction (DRR), forestry, water management and health. Increasingly, women are entering, but still under-represented in, renewable energy and mitigation activities in Vanuatu. Womens local and environmental knowledge and survival strategies are major ingredients for recovery and resilience.

Based on the findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), it is evident that people who are already most vulnerable and marginalised will experience the greatest impacts of climate change. The lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex, asexual and ally (LGBTQIA+) community is one such group, which, because of its social vulnerability, is a hidden victim of climate change to a wide extent. LGBTQIA+ individuals are uniquely vulnerable to exclusion, violence and exploitation because of the cumulative impacts of social stigma, discrimination and hatred. The social stigma around the LGBTQIA+ community also makes several social opportunities and infrastructure unavailable to them. The roots of climate change are tied with the roots of multiple oppressions.

A71 Vanuatu commits to upholding gender equity and responsiveness when implementing climate action and planning for durable solutions that are responsive to the different risks and needs of all people, including women and girls, men, and children.

A72 Vanuatu aims to ensure that all people are empowered agents of change and thus included in climate action planning and have equal opportunities to lead community-driven mitigation, adaptation and loss and damage response processes.

A73 Vanuatu commits to adhering to best-practice monitoring, evaluation and learning processes in its climate change programming that receive endorsement from the National Advisory Board on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction including promoting the use of gender analysis, sex-disaggregated data, and gender indicators.

A74 Vanuatu commits to strengthen gender responsiveness of climate change and disaster institutions and decision-making processes.

A75 Vanuatu commits to recognising diversity among women and girls in Vanuatu and their varied abilities, aspirations, circumstances and vulnerabilities, including women and girls with disabilities, widows, women-headed households, adolescent girls and elderly women.

A76 Vanuatu commits to implementing women- led initiatives that contribute towards climate adaptation.

A77 Vanuatu commits to enhancing coordination between the Gender Protection Cluster and national, provincial, municipal and community disaster and climate change committees and governance bodies.

A78 Vanuatu commits to implementing Vanuatus international and regional commitments to gender equality, human rights and climate change.

24 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 Climate change can and does have differing social, economic, public health, and other adverse impacts on underprivileged populations. Global warming is an ethical and political issue, not purely environmental or physical in nature. In Vanuatu, the government recognises the need to relate the causes and effects of climate change to concepts of environmental justice and social justice. There are real concerns about the inequitable outcomes for different people and places associated with vulnerability to climate impacts, loss and damage. Climate change is fundamentally an issue of human rights that connects the local to national to the global, with those who are most affected having contributed least to climate change. Climate change is one of the greatest threats to human rights of our generation, posing a serious risk to the fundamental rights to life, health, food and an adequate standard of living of individuals and communities across Vanuatu.

A79 Vanuatu commits to make climate justice a part of the mandate of government programming, including directing line agencies to develop programmes, policies, and activities to address the disproportionate health, environmental, economic, cultural and social impacts of climate change on disadvantaged communities and individuals.

A80 Vanuatu commits to calling for the UN General Assembly to adopt a resolution requesting the International Court of Justice to provide an Advisory Opinion on the obligations of states under international law to protect the rights of present and future generations against the adverse effects of climate change.

Vanuatus hundreds of unique indigenous cultures manage livelihood risks in a changing climate with traditional knowledge and solutions that deserve greater attention and consideration within national and global climate action arenas. Vanuatus indigenous peoples traditional ecological knowledge is based on a life lived in marginal and challenging environments, already implementing mitigation, adaptation and loss and damage strategies as part of traditional natural resources management.

Climate induced loss and damage threatens the survival of this traditional knowledge, and destroys records relating to personal identification, ownership of assets and land. Traditional knowledge is the practices, systems, skills and know-how developed by a community and passed on from one generation to another, forming part of the spiritual and cultural identity of the group.

A81 Vanuatu commits to build on and share existing traditional knowledge and expand its use by collecting, recording and incorporating climate- relevant traditional knowledge into planning, decision-making, and school curricula, while ensuring appropriate cultural protocols are respected.

A82 Vanuatu commits to preserve and enhance cultural and traditional knowledge (NSDP SOC 1.2) including appropriate climate adaptation and resilience practices relating to land tenure, agriculture, climate, biodiversity, music, weaving, dance and ceremonial rites that may enhance the cultural resilience of communities facing climate impacts.

A83 Vanuatu commits to map traditional knowledge of communities at risk of displacement and investigate ways for traditional knowledge to be used in adaptation efforts.

A84 Vanuatu commits to bridging the gap between traditional and scientific knowledge to make contributions from indigenous peoples to climate action more visible.

26 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 Children and future generations are bearing, and will continue to bear, the brunt of the impact on a polluted, degraded planet. Climate change and its effects on ni-Vanuatu youth is fast becoming a critical issue. Some of the leading killers of children worldwide are highly sensitive to climate change. Higher temperatures have been linked to increased rates of malnutrition, cholera, diarrhoeal disease and vector-borne diseases like dengue and malaria. Childrens underdeveloped immune systems put them at far greater risk of contracting these diseases and succumbing to their complications. Additionally, the loss of a parent or home due to a climate change-induced natural disaster certainly changes a childs world but it also can jeopardise their development.

A85 Vanuatu commits that every child, regardless of climate and disaster circumstances, must be able to access the education system.

A86 Vanuatu commits that 100% of schools incorporate climate risk management activities in their School Implementation Plans by 2030.

A87 Vanuatu commits to reduce gaps in relation to climate disaster responsiveness of school facilities.

A88 Vanuatu commits to enable youth to play active leadership roles in adapting to climate change, including promote programmes and projects that create awareness, skills and capacities among youth on climate action.

A89 Vanuatu commits to introduce concepts of sustainable development in regard to issues involving climate change and the environment at the primary level.

Climate adaptation action in Vanuatu can only be met if we work together. International investment, action and support are critically needed to ensure innovative and resilient development. Putting this NDC into effect will necessitate a transformative shift from business as usual. Working through a whole of government approach across the three pillars of sustainable development will need a renewed focus on building and strengthening institutional capacity. It also requires strong coordination of the partnerships with business, civil society, development agencies and donors, aligning their contributions to our national climate priorities and ensuring programme delivery takes place through national systems. To build a better and more resilient Vanuatu, we need to be supportive, empathetic, inventive, passionate and, above all, cooperative.

A90 Vanuatu commits to continue meaningful consultation with actors outside of government, including the private sector and civil society, as an important element in the analysis, context-setting and identification of partners for climate actions. Civil society organisations (CSOs), non-government organisations (NGOs) and community- based organisations (CBOs) are important actors at subnational and community levels, particularly for ensuring the integration of climate action at the local level, and with women, girls, youth, children, indigenous minorities, the elderly and people with disabilities.

A91 Vanuatu commits to strengthen its climate action and planning consultation processes, building on the current multi-sector National Advisory Board on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction and its founding principle of inclusive collaboration.

A92 Vanuatu commits to minimising top-down methods of resolving climate adaptation and loss and damage challenges, and instead prioritises community-led approaches to increase participation and ensure all people are given choices and making decisions about options without coercion.

28 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 Decentralisation brings government closer to the people by providing citizens with greater control over decision-making processes and allowing their direct participation in public service delivery. Urban areas on several islands are growing rapidly, and thus hold the key to successful national emission reduction and development of adaptative capacities. Vanuatus urban and peri-urban residents are increasingly vulnerable to multiple climate change risks and these risks are especially critical for the urban poor and marginalised populations. There is a need to 1) devolve decision-making authority, functions and resources for more effective delivery of climate related services; 2) design and implement mechanisms to ensure a bottom up flow of integrated and resilient development planning and budgeting from the Area Councils (ACs) to the National Government, and 3) enhance political and administrative authority in order to effectively and efficiently deliver climate action and services to the grassroots level.

A93 Vanuatu commits to strengthen provincial and area level coordination for implementation, in line with the Decentralisation Plan, such that Provincial and Community Climate Change Committees take a lead role in responding to climate concerns at the local level.

A94 Vanuatu commits, by expanding decentralisation processes and renewed focus on municipal development, to boost urban-rural resource efficiency and build on municipality, ward and area councils ambitious climate and resilience plans.

A95 Vanuatu commits to produce and supply detailed land use capability maps and supporting information to rural authorities (including provincial councils) that shall include information on climate risks and hazard.

Strategic frameworks and institutional structures can deliver effective climate change initiatives in a coordinated, integrated and complementary manner. The vulnerability of ni-Vanuatu communities to climate change impacts highlights important human dimensions of risk management. Effective governance is vital to ensure accountable decision-making and responsible use of resources. Elements of good governance include strong institutions, transparent processes, robust financial management, and participation from various societal groups.

A96 Vanuatu commits to further mainstreaming climate governance roles and responsibilities across the whole of government, including by strengthening the multi-agency National Advisory Board on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction (CCDRR Policy 7.1.1), and catalysing institutional change by establishing focal points and resilience units within diverse ministries and departments to decentralise and broaden climate action (CCDRR policy pp5).

A97 Vanuatu commits to integrating and harmonising climate change requirements into sectoral legislation and policies.

A98 Vanuatu commits to broaden its climate resilient development and policymaking beyond a focus on economic growth, by expanding the use of a culturally relevant and comprehensive set of indicators for use in tracking progress towards achieving sustainable development and climate action goals.

30 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 The National Policy on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction 2016-2030, provides the framework to ensure that our communities, environment and economy are resilient to the impacts of climate change and disaster risks. The policy ensures that risks are identified, assessed, reduced and managed. It was formulated following a risk governance assessment to analyse Vanuatus climate change and disaster risk governance capacity and needs at both national and local levels. The policy applies six principles: 1) accountability, 2) sustainability, 3) equity, 4) community focus, 5) collaboration, and 6) innovation. It aims to be implemented by all Government agencies and non-Governmental stakeholders. The policy takes a practical approach regarding Vanuatus resources, exposure to risks, and demographic situation. It seeks to strengthen existing capacity at national, provincial and area council levels, drawing on the countrys rich heritage, traditional knowledge, and the lessons learned from the broad range of initiatives regarding climate change and disaster risk reduction.

A99 Vanuatu commits to, as soon as possible, commence the process to develop a National Adaptation Plan (NAP) and complete it by the end of 2025.

A100 Vanuatu commits to, as soon as possible, commence the process to develop an Adaptation Communication, which will also include information on limits to adaptation resulting in Loss and Damage, and submit it to the UNFCCC by the end of 2025.

Meteorology and climate services must reach all end-users, and play a central role in effectively helping people manage and adapt to climate variability and change in Vanuatu. The production and dissemination of climate data and information, an integral part of what can be referred to as a Climate Early Warning System (CLEWS), are an essential part of Vanuatus adaptation strategy. The goal of Vanuatus CLEWS is for it to be integrated with other hazard warnings as a Multi-Hazard Early Warning System for the benefit of all ni-Vanuatu society.

A101 Vanuatu commits to tailor climate information so that it best meets the needs of Provincial Government and directly informs their climate action and response plans.

A102 Vanuatu commits to work with key sectors and Provincial Government to develop tailored Climate Watches accompanied by actions that are tailored to the capacity of the end-user and incorporate traditional knowledge where appropriate.

A103 Vanuatu commits to improve its Climate Early Warning System (CLEWS), with tailored climate bulletins issued to specific end-users and incorporating mobile phone apps.

32 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 Vanuatu is the 8th most tourism dependant country in the world, and is seeking to address its dependencies on tourism while supporting its people to stay strong and resilient in the face of future challenges. Sustainable tourism relies on the actions of people, cooperation between the public and private sector and consideration of rural communities. Therefore, increasing rural involvement in the tourism industry is prioritised through enhancing quality of services and improving infrastructure in rural areas, increasing sustainable local and foreign investment partnerships, diversification through agritourism and providing better access and marketing of all provinces. Tourism contributions to the economy are significant and the continued integration into the overall economy (both urban and rural) is critical to continued economic growth.

A104 Vanuatu commits to ensuring that tourism planning will encourage climate change adaptation strategies for the development, siting, design, and management of facilities as well as consider how tourism sites contribute to the sustainability and resilience of Vanuatu.

A105 Vanuatu commits to ensuring that the tourism industry stakeholders are aware of climate-related risks and actively engage in climate change adaptation strategies.

A106 Vanuatu commits to undertaking an inventory of all significant environmental and cultural resources are listed in provincial tourism plans, and placing restrictions on types of development in these areas, including sites that pose or exacerbate a climate change risk or exposure.

A107 Vanuatu commits to undertaking Preliminary Social and Environmental Impact Assessments on all tourism development applications that integrate climate change adaptation strategies.

A108 Vanuatu commits to implanting internationally recognised Sustainability Standards and Certification programmes to demonstrate leadership in climate-sensitive green growth.

A109 Vanuatu commits to tasking a National Tourism Committee with managing the tourism industrys activities in relation to climate change adaptation and resilience strategies.

A110 Vanuatu commits to community-based adaptation projects developed through partnerships between tourism operators and tourism dependent communities to reduce vulnerabilities to climate change.

A111 Vanuatu commits to tourism product diversification, underpinned by training and capacity building in rural areas, to enhance the resilience of rural populations.

A112 Vanuatu commits to filling climate technology gaps in the agriculture sector, especially related to crop diversification and new varieties, agroforestry and Farmer Field Schools, as well as the water sector, especially related to rainwater harvesting from roof tops, Water Safety Plans and Flood Hazard Mapping.

With hardly any global carbon budget left, there can be no delay in action. Transformational action on emissions reduction must occur as fast as possible in rich countries, followed by unprecedented rapid reduction rates in low emission countries like Vanuatu  enabled by significantly enhanced finance and support from richer countries for climate mitigation, resilience building, adaptation and Loss and Damage provisions. As developing countries like Vanuatu have contributed little to present day emission levels, the Paris Agreement clearly articulates the role developed countries play in efforts to both reducing emissions and supporting the mitigation and adaptation efforts of developing countries. As such, many of Vanuatus most ambitious commitments are conditional upon receiving international support (finance, technology transfer and capacity building).

A113 Vanuatu commits to identifying innovative sustainable financing mechanisms to support the establishment and management of ecosystem-based climate adaptation in Vanuatu. These may include initiatives such as a green tax, tax benefit systems, establishment of trusts or endowment funds (NBSAP CA3.2), payment of ecosystem services (NBSAP FIW2.4) and exploring options for a climate change and disaster risk reduction insurance or risk sharing scheme (CCDRR Policy 7.1.1).

A114 Vanuatu commits to ensuring that adequate resourcing is available for climate change and disaster risk reduction activities, building financial capacity to manage resources, and enabling access to increased international funding.

A115 Vanuatu commits to obtaining National Implementing Entity accreditation from the major climate change funds, including by meeting fiduciary standards and making measurable improvements in climate change and disaster risk reduction budgeting, financial statements, reporting, audit processes, procurement practices, project management, and transparency policies (CCDRR Policy 7.2.2).

A116 Vanuatu commits to gender-responsive budgeting for climate change, including prioritising climate financing tools that target womens grassroots initiatives and resilient development outcomes.

34 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 Vanuatu Enhanced NDC (Loss and Damage) Through no fault of its own considering its negligible contribution to global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (0.0016%), Vanuatu is already experiencing devastating effects of climate change manifested as loss and damage. Vanuatu annually suffers irrecoverable loss and damage from climate change events, including for example over 600 million USD (more than 60% of GDP) as a result of one storm, Cyclone Harold in 2020, and billions more over the last decade from slow onset impacts like ocean acidification killing our coral reefs, and sea level rise eating away our coastlines.

Loss and damage from climate change impacts is included in Vanuatus National Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy (CCDRR) which also outlines concrete actions. National stakeholders have identified irreversible loss and damage resulting from all climate hazards, including from floods, storms, cyclones, salinisation, sea level rise and more. The most challenging issues include addressing loss and damage from slow onset events and addressing non-economic losses and damages. Action and support for addressing loss and damage is urgently required, including finance, technology and capacity building.

Vanuatu has championed the right to compensation for climate loss and damage in all avenues, particularly as States and corporations fail to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and continue to expand the exploration, extraction and use fossil fuels. Vanuatu will continue to push for the Warsaw International Mechanism on Loss and Damage, and the Santiago Network on Loss and Damage to step up and provide finance, action and other urgently needed support to small island developing states like Vanuatu. Where UN mechanisms are unable to provide adequate relief from loss and damage resulting from the negligent actions of fossil fuel-related companies and the states that subsidise them, Vanuatu will seek redress elsewhere.

Vanuatu calls for the establishment and rapid mobilization of a Loss and Damage Finance Facility under the UNFCCC in order to fill critical financial gaps experienced already by our most vulnerable communities, and to address loss and damage through constructive multilateral process and thereby avoid costly legal pathways.

In this context, when the Republic of Vanuatu deposited its Paris Agreement instrument of ratification on 21 September 2016, the compendium declaration reads, in part:

The following Loss and Damage Targets have been defined in a decentralised way, by the sectors that are themselves implementing and planning for a resilient future.

36 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 L1 Vanuatu commits to contribute to and engage constructively with the UNFCCC, Paris Agreement, Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage and associated committees, bodies and networks thereof.

L2 Vanuatu commits to establish mechanisms to assess and redress loss and damage incurred as a result of climate change.

L3 Vanuatu commits to developing a loss and damage implementation framework, including risk sharing, insurance and compensation approaches at replacement value by 2030.

L4 Vanuatu commits to conducting assessments on potential and actual loss and damage across the country linked with ongoing vulnerability assessment processes, and quantifying losses (e.g. food security, culture, ecosystem services and integrity) (National CCDRR Policy 7.4.4), particularly though the Post Disaster Needs Assessment approach.

L5 Vanuatu commits to ensuring that the design and construction of public and other major infrastructure and development projects consider current and projected risks in order to minimise, avert and address loss and damage, especially by developing and adhering to climate-proofed building codes, environmental impact assessments, regulations and development guidelines.

L6 Vanuatu commits to implement affordable micro- insurance and climate insurance models to provide additional safety nets to remedy loss of income, damage to housing, infrastructure, crops and other assets from climate disasters.

L7 Vanuatu commits to facilitate community-led plans to ensure connections to ancestors and relatives buried in original locations are sustained, and as an important cultural aspect of relocation planning.

L8 Vanuatu commits to provide continuing support for life-saving and essential health care to affected populations, including rapid measures to repair and/or rebuild damaged health facilities, and erect temporary health facilities with particular attention on restoring WASH infrastructure.

L9 Vanuatu commits to address the needs of and provide durable solutions for people affected by displacement, including people at-risk of displacement, displaced people, internal migrants, people living in informal settlements, and host communities (CCDRR Relocation Policy Strategic Area 10) by enabling ministries to work together to provide protections for people at each stage of the displacement cycle (CCDRR Relocation Policy Strategic Area 3).

L10 Vanuatu commits to careful consideration of planned relocation as an option of last resort, and where communities do need to move away from hazards, either temporarily or permanently, Vanuatu aims to ensure that lessons learned from previous relocation experiences globally and in the Pacific are considered, so that movement takes place with dignity and with appropriate safeguards and human rights protections in place.

L11 Vanuatu commits to expand its calls for finance to address the loss, damage, harm and injury suffered by our people and our nation resulting from climate change (including quantifiable as well as intangible and non-economic impacts) within the multilateral climate regime.

L12 Vanuatu commits to pursue finance and other forms of support for loss, damage, harm and injury resulting from climate change (including quantifiable as well as intangible and non-economic impacts), beyond the UNFCCC where the multilateral climate processes fail to adequately address the issue.

38 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 Means of Implementation In total, the approximate cost of achieving Vanuatus Revised and Enhanced NDC is USD 1,214,350,000.

Vanuatus conditional mitigation targets are estimated to cost USD 315,600,000. This cost estimate does not cover the costs of existing measures i.e. measures included in the first NDC of Vanuatu, since these measures are under implementation and already budgeted under NERM 20162030. Furthermore, the costs for additional measures are tentative and based on similar international experiences, national circumstances of Vanuatu and other assumptions. A detailed scoping and feasibility study of enhanced NDC measures will be conducted under the NDC implementation roadmap development to determine the exact additional investment requirements.

The approximate cost of achieving Vanuatus conditional adaptation targets is estimated to be USD 721,080,000 and loss and damage targets are estimated to cost USD 177,670,000.

40 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 These figures represent the highest priority placed by Vanuatu on resilience, and the extremely high costs associated with the limits to adaptation, as exemplified by the devastating financial, social and environmental losses and damages experienced already and expected to increase exponentially as climate change accelerates. The costs for these measures are tentative and based on similar international experiences, national circumstances of Vanuatu and other assumptions. Finance, technology and capacity are urgently required to undertake detailed scoping and feasibility studies of the enhanced NDC to determine the exact additional investment requirements.

To achieve all mitigation, adaptation and loss and damage conditional targets, Vanuatu anticipates financial, technological and capacity building support from global funds such as the Green Climate Fund, Global Environment Facility, Adaptation Fund, Least Developed Countries Fund; and bilateral/multilateral agencies and development partners. These funds will be used to bolster limited national resources and technical capacities for scaling up climate action.

The activities will be implemented over a period of 10 years (20212030) by integrating them under the governments recurrent budgets as various subsidy policies, projects or programmes. As these targets are well aligned with the countrys existing policies and plans, they will have high ownership and will be implemented in a timely manner.

Vanuatu has the institutional structure for implementation of the enhanced NDC. The National Advisory Board on Climate Change & Disaster Risk Reduction (NAB) is the supreme policy making and advisory body for all disaster risk reduction and climate change programmes, projects, initiatives and activities in Vanuatu. The NAB develops Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) and Climate Change policies, guidelines and positions, advises on international and regional DRR and CC obligations, facilitates and endorses the development of new DRR and CC programmes, projects, initiatives and activities, acts as a focal point for information sharing and coordination on CC/DRR, and guides and coordinates the development of national climate finance processes.

The Ministry of Climate Change Adaptation (MoCC), Meteorology and Geo-Hazards, Energy, Environment and National Disaster Management is the nodal agency as part of the Governments efforts to streamline Vanuatus climate change natural disaster responses and sustainable development of the environment. The Department of Climate Change (DoCC), within the Ministry of Climate Change, is mandated to ensure that high quality services are provided in relation to climate change in Vanuatu. The Ministry and the National Advisory Board (NAB) are mandated with coordinating all government and non-government initiatives addressing climate change and disaster risk reduction in the country.

The Vanuatu revised and enhanced NDC will be implemented in close coordination with other line ministries including, but not limited to, the Ministries of Lands, Infrastructure and Public Utilities, Education, Health, Agriculture, Justice and Community Services, Foreign Affairs, Finance, etc., and other government departments including the Department of Climate Change (DoCC), Department of Energy (DoE), Department of Environment, Utilities Regulatory Authority (URA), public and private sector mainly UNELCO Engie (UNELCO), Vanuatu Utilities and Infrastructure Limited (VUI), and other private sector service providers; donor agencies and development partners and non-governmental organisations (NGOs).

Geo-Hazards  ITC and Engineering  Forecasting  Observations (Bauerfield, Pekoa, Sola, Ambae, Lamap, Whitegrass, Analcahuet)  Environmental Protection  Biodiversity and Conservation  Environmental Planning and Impact Assessment  Provincial Outreach  Finance, Administration and Support Services  Off-Grid  On-Grid  Petroleum  Energy Efficiency and Conservation  Finance and Administration  Management, Planning, Coordination and Operations  Provincial Liaison  Finance and Administration 42 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 Information on Vanuatus NDC provided in according to guidelines in Decision 4/CMA.1 Activity-based targets, sectoral and policy targets across multiple sectors, including emissions reduction in some sub-sectors.

The GHG emission reduction targets in this section are all conditional upon international support (financial and technical support) being made available.

Most of the adaptation and loss and damage targets are fully or partially conditional upon international action and support (finance, capacity and technical) being made available. Information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding (ICTU) of the enhanced nationally determined contribution of Vanuatu for the timeframe 20212030.

1. Quantified information on the reference point, including, as appropriate, a base year a. Reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s).

The reference year used in Vanuatus updated NDC is 2010.

b. Quantifiable information on the reference indicators, their values in the reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s), and, as applicable, in the target year.

As per the Greenhouse Gas Inventory (under the second National Communication Report), the net GHG emissions (excluding removals) for the base year, was 728. 359 Gg CO2eq.

The direct GHG emission for the following IPCC sectors is:

Others: 0 Gg CO2eq.

44 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 1. Quantified information on the reference point, including, as appropriate, a base year c. For strategies, plans and actions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement, or policies and measures as components of nationally determined contributions where paragraph 1(b). above is not applicable, Parties to provide other relevant information.

The mitigation policies presented in this NDC will be further developed/enhanced and implemented upon international (technical and financial) support by 2030.

The mitigation policy targets that are not quantified are:

Energy Sector:  Implementation of NERM: 2016-2030  National coconut oil strategy  Milage and Emission Standards for Vehicles  National Electric Vehicles (e-Mobility) Policy  Energy Efficiency in Commercial and Residential Sector policy  Ecotourism Policy (Supported by Local Communities) AFOLU Sector:  Sustainable Forest Management Policy and REDD+ Programme/ strategy  Livestock farming and pasture management Waste Sector:  Municipal Solid Waste Management Policy  Waste to Energy and Composting, Recycling, etc.  Wastewater Management Policy The Adaptation and Loss and Damage targets and policy measures highlighted in this NDC have been developed and published by sector agencies and line departments working on climate change issues. It is expected that government budget will cover some part of those policy targets, but due to Vanuatus status as a recently graduated LDC, budget limitations are highly likely, further amplifying the need for international action and support.

1. Quantified information on the reference point, including, as appropriate, a base year d. Target relative to the reference indicator, expressed numerically, for example in percentage or amount of reduction.

The quantified mitigation targets presented in this NDC are all conditional, and will be implemented upon international (technical and financial) support by 2030.

Most of the adaptation and loss and damage targets are fully or partially conditional upon international action and support (finance, capacity and technical) being made available. In some cases, adaptation and loss and damage numerical targets are expressed in the commitments highlighted above.

Electric Vehicles  2/3 wheelers - - 1000 No.

e. Information on sources of data used in quantifying the reference point(s).

The key data references and documents assessed include, but are not limited to:

Vanuatus first Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC);

National Sustainable Development Plan: 2016-2030 (NSDP or Vanuatu 2030: The Peoples Plan);

Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction (CCDRR) Policy;

Meteorology, Geological Hazards and Climate Change Act No.25 of 2016;

National Energy Roadmap (NERM): 2016- 2030 and NERM-Implementation Plan;

NDC implementation roadmap;

National Communications (NC-1,2 and 3);

Data and information provided by the Government of Vanuatu line ministries and departments; Public and Private Sector and, Stakeholder consultation including NGOs, and 46 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 1. Quantified information on the reference point, including, as appropriate, a base year f. Information on the circumstances under which the Party may update the values of the reference indicators.

Vanuatu may update the base year data in future NDCs on the basis of:  Additional technical analysis in Biennial Update Reports, National Communications, and as the economic impacts of COVID-19 become better understood.  Lack of climate finance, capacity or technical support from developed country parties and other international sources.  Sector adaptation/Loss and Damage policies and targets are reviewed and amended.  Some of the mitigation actions are part of the NERM implementation plan and subject to international support (technical and financial); in the delay or absence of support.  In the next greenhouse gas inventory, Vanuatu may update the reference indicators of existing sectors and/or may provide new values for sectors that were not previously covered.  Vanuatu is prone to and highly vulnerable to the effects of natural disasters (tsunami, cyclones, earthquakes, volcano eruptions, etc.), in the case of any major natural disaster or pandemic situation similar to COVID-19, Vanuatu may update/change the reference point.

Vanuatu is in a transition phase after graduation from the least developed country (LDC) category; hence any major change in economic and social environment may lead to updates or change the values of the reference indicators.

a. Time frame and/ or period for implementation, including start and end date, consistent with any further relevant decision adopted by the CMA.

Several targets are a continuation and expansion of efforts listed in the first NDC. Vanuatu has already begun to implement these targets. The new mitigation adaptation and loss and damage target time frame is from 1July 202131 December 2030.

b. Whether it is a single- year or multi-year target, as applicable.

Single-year target 2030, including updates in 2025.

(The NDC interventions will be implemented in phases as per annual work plans; however, the target final year is 2030).

a. General description of the target.

Vanuatu enhanced and revised NDC presents sectoral activity-based and policy targets on adaptation, loss and damage and mitigation, including emissions reduction in some sectors. The Government of Vanuatu will meet conditional targets upon on receiving international action and support including financing, technology transfer and/or capacity building. b. Sectors, gases, categories and pools covered by the nationally determined contribution, as applicable, consistent with IPCC guidelines.

The IPCC Sectors, Sub-sector and Gases applicable for Vanuatu:

1. Energy  Energy Industries - Electricity  Generation/Renewable Energy  Transport  Other Sectors (Residential, Institutional and Commercial) 3. Agriculture, Forestry, and Other Land Use (AFOLU)  Livestock  Forests  Not Included A co-benefit of reducing CO2 emission from the above-mentioned sectors is that there will also be concomitant reductions in emissions in other gases like NMVOCs.

The Adaptation and Loss and Damage sectors covered by this NDC include:

Agriculture  Biosecurity  Fisheries  Forestry  Livestock  Water  Health  Environment  Oceans  Waste  ICT  Infrastructure  Disability  Gender  Human Rights  Indigenous  Youth  Collaboration  Decentralisation  Governance  Policy  Meteorology  Tourism  Finance 48 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 c. How the Party has taken into consideration paragraphs 31(c) and (d) of decision 1/CP.21.

As per paragraph 31(c) of decision 1/CP.21, Vanuatu is not including all IPCC sectors, sub-sectors and categories. Regardless, Vanuatus NDC target constitutes the highest possible ambition, in the context of our national analyses of mitigation potential.

According to national circumstances that Vanuatu is a small-island state, with limited technical, financial and skilled resources to collect data, process and analyse data, Vanuatu has decided that at this time, other sources and sinks of emissions (most of negligible relevance for Vanuatu) would not be included in this updated NDC.

Note that all key categories and gases identified as relevant for Vanuatu have been included in the NDC. Furthermore, Vanuatu is willing to include other remaining categories of anthropogenic emissions or removals (as may become applicable) in its future nationally determined contributions.

Vanuatu aims to extend the scope of the coverage of its NDC over time to all categories of anthropogenic emissions and removal, as more robust data, finance, technical support and capacity becomes available. This approach is in line with the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, in the light of different national circumstances.

Vanuatu plans to demonstrate leadership among developing countries by continuing to enhance its mitigation efforts and to move towards economy-wide emissions limitation or reduction targets over time.

In keeping with Article 2 of the UNFCCC, Vanuatu demands that emission stabilisation should be achieved globally, and domestically by all countries within a time frame sufficient to allow ecosystems to adapt naturally to climate change, to ensure that food production is not threatened and to enable economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner.

d. Mitigation co-benefits resulting from Parties adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans, including description of specific projects, measures and initiatives of Parties adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans.

The majority of Vanuatus adaptation and loss and damage commitments contain mitigation co-benefits. In many cases (for example in infrastructure, forestry and waste adaptation targets), it is difficult to classify a target as primarily adaptation or purely mitigation.

Some of the co-benefits expected for specific activities are as follows:  Carbon sequestration by developing and implementing better practices in agricultural, livestock and forestry production;  Climate proofing buildings and infrastructure often involves using more fossil fuel efficient designs and lowering emissions profiles  Reduced emissions from implementing fuel efficient technologies for aquaculture and fishing operations;  Reduced emissions from wastewater management and introduction of renewable energy technologies in the Water sector;  Reduced emissions from implementing resilient ecosystem and environmental activities to better manage the available ecosystem services and resources.

The mitigation co-benefits of adaptation actions contained within this NDC were not quantitatively evaluated due to a lack of quality data and technical resources. However, Vanuatu will soon begin efforts to develop its NAP, including a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan which will focus on tracking the implementation of the cross-sectoral measures with mitigation co-benefits. This tool will monitor and evaluate adaptation, and to some extent, mitigation actions on climate change implemented in Vanuatu and include new or additional information as part of the NAP iterative process.

The mitigation co-benefits from forest sector interventions cannot be included at this point due to ongoing negotiations on Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, in conjunction with Vanuatus rollout of a national REDD+ programme.

a. Information on the planning processes that the Party undertook to prepare its NDC and, if available, on the Partys implementation plans, including, as appropriate:

i. Domestic institutional arrangements, public participation and engagement with local communities and indigenous peoples, in a gender- responsive manner.

The Republic of Vanuatus NDC has been through two iterations from 20212022, with the primary purpose of making it more ambitious by including sector-led adaptation and loss and damage commitments.

Both iterations of the revised and enhanced NDC have been developed through an inclusive and participatory process, with a series of public and in-person consultations.

The mitigation enhancement process was led by the Department of Climate Change (DoCC) under the guidance of the Ministry of Climate Change Adaptation, Meteorology, GeoHazards Energy, Environment and Disaster Management (MoCC).

The stakeholders of all line ministries and departments of Government of Vanuatu engaged in the mitigation revision included the Department of Energy, Department of Environmental Protection and Conservation, Department of Forests, Department of Meteorology, Department of Geological Hazards, Department of Fisheries, Department of Livestock, Department of Biosecurity, Department of Strategic Planning and Aid Coordination, Department of Womens Affairs gender policy, etc., also participated in the NDC enhancement process. The private sector including utility companies, energy sector vendors, development partners and NGOs were engaged and consulted during the NDC revision process.

On 27 May 2022, the Parliament of the Republic of Vanuatu officially Declared a Climate Emergency including the decision to submit this revised and enhanced NDC before COP27 as per obligations under the COP26 Glasgow Pact.

The adaptation and loss and damage enhancement process involved stakeholders from the Departments of Climate Change, Environment, Energy, Environment, Water, Meteorology/Geohazards, Strategic Policy Planning/Aid Coordination, Local Authorities, Finance, Agriculture, Livestock, Forestry, Fisheries, Biosecurity, Foreign Affairs, Public Works, Womens Affairs, State Law, Disaster Management, Education, Tourism and Statistics. In addition, the following representatives from private sector and non-government organizations provided expert guidance and input: Vanuatu Climate Action Network, Vanuatu Association of NGOs, Vanuatu Climate Adaptation Project, Save the Children, Live and Learn, Global Green Growth Institute, UK High Commission, Vanuatu Business Resilience Council, UN Development Programme, Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme, the Pacific Community, German Agency for International Cooperation, UN Food and Agriculture Organisation, International Union for the Conservation of Nature and the Pacific NDC Hub.

Consultations were carried out at the national level for mitigation given the small size and population of Vanuatu and COVID-19 emergency measures, while adaptation and loss and damage consultations also reached the largest province of SANMA. However, the government departments, private sector participants, NGOs and development partners are also involved with projects and programmes at subnational level and thus adequately represented subnational level stakeholders.

Gender equality and the inclusion of women, youth, people with disabilities, and other vulnerable groups was an integral part of the NDC enhancement process. A gender expert within the Department of Climate Change Team reviewed the gender-responsive considerations in the enhanced NDC. n addition, a gender analysis was commissioned by the Pacific NDC Hub and provided recommendations on the gender- sensitive implementation of this revised and enhanced NDC.

The enhanced NDC actions/measures comply with key issues and requirements of gender sensitive design as per the national policies and Gender Analysis and Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) guidance. None of the enhanced NDC actions are expected to impact negatively on gender equality and womens rights, or limit womens access to and control over natural resources and the goods and services covered under the enhanced NDC.

Furthermore, all targets and commitments align with the requirements under NSDP, CCDRR Policy and NERM. These policies extensively promote gender responsive, youth-specific needs and roles on green employment, awareness and capacity building.

The enhanced NDC actions/measure will contribute positively on gender, youth and other vulnerable group-specific needs and will provide these demographics the opportunity to play a more active role in design and implementation.

All targets have undergone scrutiny by experts and leaders through a series of internal and external consultation carried out during the NDC enhancement process and several national level public consultations to receive the comments and feedback.

Further, the enhanced/revised NDC has been endorsed by the Vanuatus National Advisory Board on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction (NAB  the supreme policy making and advisory body for all disaster risk reduction and climate change programmes, projects, initiatives and activities in Vanuatu) and Council of Ministers (CoM), Government of Vanuatu.

50 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 a. ii. Contextual matters, including, inter alia, as appropriate:

Geography: The Republic of Vanuatu is an island nation located in the Western Pacific Ocean. Vanuatu is an archipelago of over 80 islands stretching 1,300 kilometres from North to South in the Western Pacific Ocean. Vanuatu is located between latitude 12 to 23 South and longitude 166 to 173 East.

Vanuatus terrain is mostly mountainous, with narrow coastal plains with a total land area of 12,336 km2 and a maritime exclusive economic zone of 680,000 km2. Almost 74% of the land area in Vanuatu is covered by natural vegetation, with around one third covered by forest; which is more than 36.1% (440,000 hectares covered by tropical forest).

The largest island is Espiritu Santo, while the island of Efate is home to the capital, Port Vila and the central Vanuatu Government. From largest to smallest, the islands are Espiritu Santo, Malekula, Efate, Erromango, Ambrym, Tanna, Pentecost, Epi, Ambae or Aoba, Vanua Lava, Gaua, Maewo, Malo, and Anatom or Aneityum. The two largest islands, Espiritu Santo and Malekula, comprise nearly 50% of the total land mass. Larger islands are characterised by rugged volcanic peaks and tropical rainforests. The highest peak, Mount Tabwemasana on Espiritu Santo, is 1877m above mean sea level and the total coastline is about 2,528 km long.

Vanuatu is geographically located in the ring of fire and the cyclone belt of the Pacific. The island nation is located in a seismically and volcanically active region and has high exposure to geologic hazards, including volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, tsunamis and landslides. Almost 81% of its landmass and 76% of its population is exposed to two or more potential hazards including volcanic eruptions, cyclones, earthquakes, droughts, tsunamis, storm surges, coastal and river flooding and landslides.

Climate: Vanuatu is situated in a tropical maritime climate with characteristic uniform temperature, high humidity and variable rainfall. The tropical climate is moderated by southeast trade winds that occur from May to October. There are two main seasons, hot and wet from November to April, and cool and dry from May to October. Being an equatorial country, Vanuatu has relatively uniform temperature throughout the year with daily temperature ranging from 20C to 30C. Temperatures in the warmest months (January- February) are about 4C higher than those in the coolest months (July-August).

Population: According to the most recent National Population and Housing censuses (NPHC) of 2020, Vanuatu's population was 300,019 compared to 272,459 in 2016's mini census and 234,023 in 2009's census. Vanuatu's population is largely based within rural areas ~77.7% as per 2020 NPHC.

Economy: Vanuatu is traditionally known for its strong cultural heritage, traditional activities and subsistence farming. The four mainstays of Vanuatus economy are agriculture, tourism, offshore financial services, and raising cattle. Exports include copra, kava, beef, cocoa, and timber, and imports include machinery and equipment, foodstuffs, and fuel.

In 2017, Vanuatus economy grew by 4.4% with a strong performance over the last three years. Subsequently it was further projected for the economy to grow by 3.4% in 2018 from 2017 growth levels. Growth was primarily driven by construction activities related to the on-going infrastructure development projects and reconstruction projects from category 5 tropical cyclone Pam in 2015.

In early 2020, category 5 tropical cyclone Harold struck multiple islands in Northern Vanuatu causing losses and damages of over 60% of GDP. Soon afterward the COVID-19 lockdowns took a serious toll on tourism and other service sectors. With no income tax revenues, the Government has maintained budget flows through its citizenship by investment programmes. Overall, the economy has stagnated since 2020 requiring extensive government subsidies and private sector support programmes.

a. ii. Contextual matters, including, inter alia, as appropriate:

In addition to the planning process discussed in section 4 (a) (i). The Government of Vanuatu has taken a one-of-a-kind initiative to identify the circular economy options for Vanuatu and constituted the metabolic analysis of its economy and economic sectors.

A metabolic assessment has been conducted to define a resource efficient and low-carbon future for Vanuatu. The metabolic assessment observed that the average material uses and per capita GHG emissions in Vanuatu is low in comparison to the global average. The existing consumption-based resource footprint of Vanuatu is 58%, which is already relatively circular, meaning that 58% of the materials used in the country is relying on secondary or renewable materials and energy sources.

The remaining 42% of material use is not circular and can be characterised as following a linear take-make-waste trajectory. These 42% of materials are mostly of foreign origin and undermine the development ambitions of the country since they create issues with waste disposal and the deterioration of natural assets as a result of the pollution of soils, surface waters and marine environments. The circular economy analysis identified some of the opportunities which contribute to the domestic and transboundary (international) GHG emission reductions. Some of the key circular economy actions (CE strategies) identified by the metabolic assessment have been included in Vanuatus enhanced NDC.

Furthermore, the Government of Vanuatu has also developed and implemented an Integrated Monitoring, Reporting and Verification (MRV) Tool for the Energy Sector (currently being enhanced to cover additional mitigation sectors according to the updated NDC) and a Monitoring, Reporting Verification Tool for NERM 20162030. Vanuatus integrated MRV Tool is a first of Its kind initiative to integrate most of the domestic and international climate action monitoring, tracking and reporting requirements. Further, it supports government agencies, development partners, and NGOs towards evidence-based decisions and data insights reporting. Vanuatus integrated MRV Tool has been customised to track, monitor and report data critical for climate actions and sustainable development goals.

One of Vanuatus most advanced and transformative best practices is the establishment of the National Advisory Board on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction which achieves two goals: 1) the merging of resources to address both climate and non-climate disasters into a single institutional framework and 2) providing a single entry point for climate change policy and governance which embodies a range of ministries, sectors and stakeholders. This enhanced and revised NDC would not have been able to include both adaptation and loss and damage without such an integrated and comprehensive institutional structure.

Another important best practice employed in the development of this NDC is the full reliance and decentralisation of climate action to sectors. Sector agencies and stakeholders know best the ambitions and realities of action and have already codified these into their endorsed and gazetted policies, plans and strategies. Thus, this NDC uses the outstanding work being planned and actioned, without duplicating work or causing consultation fatigue.

The following are additional best practices that have been identified during the preparation of Vanuatus NDC:

A key component of Vanuatus NDC is that it was built upon existing processes, data collection, policies, initiatives, and commitments. In doing so, Vanuatu was able to take advantage of updated inventories, robust data and crosscutting expertise.

Capitalising on the synergies and timing of the different processes, Vanuatu increased collaboration across Implementing Partners and reduced the need to conduct separate stakeholder consultations on similar issues, therefore reducing stakeholder fatigue. It is essential for Implementing Partners to work together in a seamless manner.

The engagement of stakeholders from public sector, private sector, academia and civil society was key to ensuring the interest and buy-in to the NDC process and revised targets.

The Government of Republic of Vanuatu is fully committed to effective, and transparent implementation of the Paris Agreement (PA), and supports its aims to strengthen the global response to the threat of climate change, in the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty, and also limit global average temperature rise to 1.5C; which poses lower risks for Vanuatu in comparison to 2C or higher temperatures.

The Government of Vanuatus commitment is reflected in its declaration: WHEREAS the Government of the Republic of Vanuatu declares its understanding that ratification of the Paris Agreement shall in no way constitute a renunciation of any rights under any other laws, including international law, and the communication depositing the Republics instrument of ratification shall include a declaration to this effect for international record;

FURTHERMORE, the Government of the Republic of Vanuatu declares that, in light of best scientific information and assessment on climate change and its impacts, it considers the emission reduction obligations in Article 3 of the Kyoto Protocol, the Doha Amendment and the aforesaid Paris Agreement to be inadequate to prevent global temperature increase of 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-Industrial levels and as a consequence, will have severe implications for our national interests...

52 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 b. Specific information applicable to Parties, including regional economic integration organisations and their member States, that have reached an agreement to act jointly under Article 4, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement, including the Parties that agreed to act jointly and the terms of the agreement, in accordance with Article 4, paragraphs 16 18, of the Paris Agreement.

Vanuatu is not part of an agreement to act jointly under Article 4 of the Paris Agreement. c. How the Partys preparation of its NDC has been informed by the outcomes of the global stock take, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreement.

As a responsible party of the Paris Agreement, the Government of Vanuatu will comply with the decisions under the PA and actively participate in the first global stock take in 2023.

Furthermore, Vanuatus enhanced NDCs for 20212030 is more ambitious than its previous one, both in terms of its sectoral coverage and in terms of its net emission reduction contribution as well.

Importantly, Vanuatus enhanced and revised NDC now includes both adaptation and loss and damage contributions and targets.

Vanuatu calls on all Parties to increase ambition in line with the best available and most recent science and obligations under the agreement.

d. Each Party with an NDC under Article 4 of the Paris Agreement that consists of adaptation action and/or economic diversification plans resulting in mitigation co-benefits consistent with Article 4, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement to submit information on:

i. How the economic and social consequences of response measures have been considered in developing the NDC.

The effects on vulnerability, resilience, economic transformation and standards of living were considered in developing the updated NDC.

The majority of households in Vanuatu are located in remote locations with no on-grid electricity access, in fact, most households already rely on renewable energy to meet their basic lighting and cooking needs. Thus there will be minimal consequences for the people of Vanuatu as the nation enables the transition of economies and societies away from fossil fuels and towards a low-carbon future. Rather, the implementation of mitigation policies, programmes and actions in-jurisdiction are widely expected to bring adaptation and resilience co-benefits.

ii. Specific projects, measures and activities to be implemented to contribute to mitigation co-benefits, including information on adaptation plans that also yield mitigation co- benefits, which may cover, but are not limited to, key sectors, such as energy, resources, water resources, coastal resources, human settlements and urban planning, agriculture and forestry; and economic diversification actions, which may cover, but are not limited to, sectors such as manufacturing and industry, energy and mining, transport and communication, construction, tourism, real estate, agriculture and fisheries.

There are multiple projects and project concepts currently underway and already approved by the National Advisory Board on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction which are expected to have mitigation co- benefits from adaptation and loss and damage actions. For example:

Climate Information Services for Resilient Development in Vanuatu (Van-KIRAP)- including adaptation activities around climate start agriculture, expanded use of renewable energy, climate smart tourism and other adaptation-mitigation initiatives.

Adaptation to Climate Change in the Coastal Zone in Vanuatu Project (VCAP2)  includes climate smart infrastructure as well as ecosystem-based adaptation (protected forest areas) and other adaptation- mitigation initiatives.

Blue Carbon Project will focus on protecting and enhancing management of coastal habitats including coral reefs and mangroves and other adaptation-mitigation initiatives.

Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience project will reduce the climate-related vulnerabilities of communities across Vanuatu; increase their resilience to climate variability, extremes and change; and build the adaptive capacity required to ensure communities can maintain sustainable development pathways across a wide range of climate futures.

As mentioned in 3(d) above, Vanuatu is still in the process of developing additional programming for other priority sectors for adaptation and loss and damage. As the development of the NAP is a continuous and ongoing process, these might, in the future, include projects with mitigation co-benefits on adaptation actions; however, they are not mentioned here as the specific projects could change or additional projects added to the current project portfolios.

5. Assumptions and methodological approaches, including those for estimating and accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and, as appropriate, removals:

a. Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals corresponding to the Partys nationally determined contribution, consistent with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 31, and accounting guidance adopted by the CMA.

Vanuatu accounts for its anthropogenic GHG emissions and removals using the 2006 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories).

Two additional guidelines will be considered for quality assurance: the IPCC Good Practice Guidance and Uncertainty Management in National GHG Inventory (2000) and the IPCC Good Practice Guideline for Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry (2003).

b. Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for the implementation of policies and measures or strategies in the nationally determined contribution.

As discussed above, Vanuatu will also apply specific assumptions and methodologies where relevant when accounting for various policies and measures in its Biennial Update Report, Biennial Transparency Report, or National Communications.

c. If applicable, information on how the Party will take into account existing methods and guidance under the Convention to account for anthropogenic emissions and removals, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 14, of the Paris Agreement, as appropriate.

As discussed above, the IPCC 2006 Guidelines have been used to calculate emissions in the GHG Inventory for National Communication and NDC.

d. IPCC methodologies and metrics used for estimating anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals.

Further to above discussion, the preparation of national GHG inventories for Vanuatu, uses both Tier1 and Tier2 methodologies (as appropriate) of 2006 IPCC guidelines.

e. Sector-, category- or activity-specific assumptions, methodologies and approaches consistent with IPCC guidance, as appropriate, including, as applicable:

i. Approach to addressing emissions and subsequent removals from natural disturbances on managed lands.

ii. Approach used to account for emissions and removals from harvested wood products.

iii. Approach used to address the effects of age-class structure in forests. f. Other assumptions and methodological approaches used for understanding the nationally determined contribution and, if applicable, estimating corresponding emissions and removals, including:

i. How the reference indicators, baseline(s) and/ or reference level(s), including, where applicable, sector-, category- or activity-specific reference levels, are constructed, including, for example, key parameters, assumptions, definitions, methodologies, data sources and models used.

Not applicable. Please see Section 5(a-e) for assumptions and methodologies used.

54 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 5. Assumptions and methodological approaches, including those for estimating and accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and, as appropriate, removals:

f. ii. For Parties with nationally determined contributions that contain non greenhouse- gas components, information on assumptions and methodological approaches used in relation to those components, as applicable.

Not applicable.

iii. For climate forces included in nationally determined contributions not covered by IPCC guidelines, information on how the climate forces are estimated.

Not applicable.

iv. Further technical information, as necessary.

Not applicable.

g. The intention to use voluntary cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, if applicable.

Vanuatu will explore opportunities for climate resilient socio-economic development with international cooperation and support including carbon market under Article 6.

National level market-based instruments, such as cap-and-trade emission trading schemes and offsetting, may be a solution in Vanuatu to price carbon emissions and keep the costs of mitigation in Vanuatu low. These will be investigated further for applicability.

Vanuatu is in the process of implementing a national REDD+ programme.

6. How the Party considers that its NDC is fair and ambitious in light of its national circumstances a. How the Party considers that its NDC is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances; The Government of Vanuatu is steadfast in its conviction that global mitigation efforts should focus on stabilising global GHG emissions at levels that will limit increases in global average temperatures to well below 1.5C above preindustrial levels.

Vanuatu is a small island developing country, that has an insignificant contribution to global GHG emissions, historically its GHG emissions have been very low: Vanuatus total CO2equivalent emissions was approximately 0.0011% of the Global GHG emissions for 2015.

Vanuatu has taken an ambitious target of transitioning to close to 100% renewable energy in the electricity sector by 2030. With this enhanced NDC, Vanuatu is planning to further reduce its national GHG emissions by 2030. Vanuatus adaptation and loss and damage targets are some of the most ambitious and comprehensive in the world, highlighting the priority of these two pillars of the Paris Agreement to Vanuatu. Thus, this NDC, and the accompanying information, reflects Vanuatus commitment under the Paris Agreement to address climate change.

Vanuatus NDC target constitutes the highest possible ambition, in the context of our national analyses of mitigation potential.

Vanuatu plans to demonstrate leadership among developing countries by continuing to enhance our mitigation efforts and to move towards economy-wide emissions limitation or reduction targets over time.

b. Fairness considerations, including reflecting on equity.

Vanuatu aims to extend the scope of the coverage of its NDC over time to all categories of anthropogenic emissions and removal, as more robust data, finance, technical support and capacity becomes available. This approach is in line with the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, in the light of different national circumstances.

In keeping with Article 2 of the UNFCCC, Vanuatu demands that emission stabilisation should be achieved globally, and domestically by all countries within a time frame sufficient to allow ecosystems to adapt naturally to climate change, to ensure that food production is not threatened and to enable economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner.

6. How the Party considers that its NDC is fair and ambitious in light of its national circumstances c. How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 3, of the Paris Agreement.

Vanuatus updated NDC represents a significant enhancement of its first NDC. Vanuatus enhanced NDC builds on the ambition of its first NDC, both in terms of its sectoral coverage and in terms of its net emission reduction contribution as well.

Most significantly, this NDC now includes a range of adaptation and loss and damage commitments and targets which set us up for a more resilience future.

d. How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement.

The ambition of this target must be considered against the background of the countrys small, open economy and limitations in natural, financial, technological and human resources to implement the measures necessary to achieve the intended emissions reductions.

It must also be noted that the value of Vanuatus forest cover as a carbon sink is recognised, despite the fact that these values are not included in the projections.

In addition to the sectoral activity-based targets for electricity generation, transport energy efficiency, other livestock, and waste sector, this NDC also includes additional policy targets for sectors where data and/or baseline information is not available such as for livestock, solid waste and wastewater management. This paves way for Vanuatu to establish economy-wide emissions target, based on national circumstances and capabilities.

e. How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement.

Vanuatu, as a SIDS and considering Article 4, paragraph 6, has the option to prepare and communicate strategies, plans and actions reflecting its special circumstances.

In light of Vanuatus commitment to limiting increases in global average temperatures to well below 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, it has submitted quantifiable targets as outlined in 1(b) above.

As Vanuatus NDC now covers adaptation, loss and damage as well as mitigation, its plans and actions addressing adaptation and the possible limits to adaptation that may result in loss and damage, are outlined by Vanuatu s various submissions to the UNFCCC.

In addition to the sectoral activity-based mitigation targets Vanuatus enhanced NDC also includes policy targets (See section 1(d)) for areas where data and/or baseline information is not available. These mitigation areas include livestock and waste management.

7. How the NDC contributes towards achieving the objectives of the Convention as set out in its Article 2 a. How the NDC contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2.

See 6(a) above.

Vanuatu feels that Article 2 of the convention is closely linked to Article 8 of the Paris Agreement on the importance of averting, minimising and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change, including extreme weather events and slow onset events, and the role of sustainable development in reducing the risk of loss and damage.

Sadly, Vanuatu has reached the limits of adaptation in many instances, with climate change already causing loss and damage as exemplified in Article 2, disenabling ecosystems to adapt naturally to climate change, witnessing threats to food security, and observing devastation to economic development.

In this context, Vanuatus enhanced and revised NDC makes every effort to more comprehensively to undertake adaptation action, while at the same time, calling for increased support to address loss and damage. All three Pillars of the Paris Agreement are critical, and equally addressed in this NDC.

b. How the NDC contributes towards Article 2, paragraph 1(a), and Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Paris Agreement. See 6(a) above. Vanuatu is planning to work on a long-term strategy to decarbonise the economy in line with Article 2 paragraph 1(a) and Article 4 paragraph 1.

56 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 ANNEX II Additional Identified Targets and Indicators for the Agriculture Sector This Annex II is complementary to the revised and enhanced NDC, and is the result of work undertaken by the "Enhancing Vanuatu's NDC to include quantifiable adaptation targets" project enabled by Deutsche Gesellschaft fr Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) and the Regional Pacific Nationally Determined Contributions Hub.

Target Ag1: By 2022, 80% of agriculture SMEs and private sector operators are able to generate sufficient income to cover essential household needs and services in normal and (climate, disaster and environmentally) stressed times.

Indicator Ag1.1: Climate vulnerable agriculture SMEs and private sector operators for all six provinces mapped, using GIS as well as human rights based, gender-sensitive and socially inclusive approaches and methods of assessment. [ENV 1.1.2; ENV 1.1.3; ENV 1.4.3].

Indicator Ag1.2: Natural resource related measures to strengthen agriculture SMEs and private sector operators in the six provinces identified and implemented (e.g. soil and land quality and access, stocks of climate resilience seedlings) [SOC 1.7.2].

Indicator Ag1.3: Infrastructure related measures to strengthen agriculture SMEs and private sector operators in the six provinces identified and implemented (e.g. inter-island freight; extension services, stocks of climate resilience biotechnology and equipment; [post-disaster] value chain support system). [ECO 3.4.1].

Indicator Ag1.4: Skills and training related measures to strengthen agriculture SMEs and private sector operators in the six provinces identified and implemented (e.g. climate and disaster resilient cropping training, produce market, value chain production, etc). [ENV 1.4.2; ENV 1.5.1].

Indicator Ag1.5: Institutional and governance related measures to strengthen agriculture SMEs and private sector operators in the six provinces identified and implemented (community decision- making, planning and action related to supporting agriculture SMEs at community, area, province level).

Indicator Ag1.6: Financing related measures to strengthen agriculture SMEs and private sector operators in the six provinces identified and implemented (e.g. agriculture SME insurance cover).

Indicator Ag1.7: Proportion of agriculture SMEs and private sector operators in each of the six provinces operating in normal and (climate, disaster and environmentally) stressed times [ECO 3.4.2; ECO 4.2.1].

Indicator Ag1.8: Changes in the number of agriculture SMEs and private sector operators in the most vulnerable communities in each of the six provinces. [ENV 1.1.3; ECO 3.4.2].

Indicator Ag1.9: Proportion of men and women operating agriculture SMEs and private sector operators in each of the six provinces in normal and (climate, disaster and environmentally) stressed times. [ECO 3.4.2; ECO 4.2.1].

Indicator Ag1.10: Turnover generated by agriculture SMEs and private sector operators, by gender and province in normal and (climate, disaster and environmentally) stressed times. [ENV 1.1.3].

Indicator Ag2.11: Percentage of agriculture SMEs and private sector operators covered by crop and livestock insurance.

Indicator Ag1.12: Proportion of agriculture SMEs and private sector operators in each of the six provinces operating on customary land in normal and (climate, disaster and environmentally) stressed times [ECO 3.4.2; ECO 4.2.1].

Indicator Ag1.13: Total number of agriculture based rural producer cooperatives registered by province in normal and (climate, disaster and environmentally) stressed times [ECO 3.4.2; ECO 4.2.1].

Indicator Ag1.14: Total number of primary, secondary and tertiary schools that teach climate resilient commercial agriculture.

ENV 1.1.1 Proportion of households engaged in production of food for own consumption. ENV 1.1.2 Up to date data on primary production (agriculture, livestock, forestry, fisheries, biosecurity) available for analysis and informed decision-making and reporting.

ENV 1.1.3 Average incidence of food poverty at the household level (Food Poverty Line). SOC 1.2.2 Proportion of population possessing common and basic traditional production skills related to weaving, transport, housing, farming, food preparation.

ENV 1.4.2 Total number of people receiving training in food storage and preservation per year in MALFFB led, NGO or partnered initiatives.

ENV 1.4.3 Establishment of land use capability mapping systems to determine which crops and farming systems are best suited to different areas.

ENV 1.3.2 Domestic food price level.

ENV 1.5.1 Proportion of producers across the productive sector that have undergone Agro-Met training.

ENV 1.5.3 Proportion of farmers involved in integrated farming practices.

ECO 3.4.1 Total annual number of agricultural extension services per capita by province.

ENV 3.1.2 Institutional strengthening of NAB, Department of Climate Change and other MoCC departments.

ECO 3.4.2 Total number of rural producer cooperatives registered by province.

ECO 4.2.1 Proportion of rural households engaged.

ECO 4.3.1 Total number of processed local products produced per annum for domestic consumption and export.

ECO 4.3.2 Ratio of processed export commodities (including coconut, kava, cocoa, coffee) to raw exports.

58 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 Target Ag2 Indicator Ag2.1: Climate vulnerabilities of subsistence agriculture for all six provinces mapped, using GIS as well as human rights based, gender-sensitive and socially inclusive approaches and methods of assessment. [ENV 1.1.2; ENV 1.1.3; ENV 1.4.3].

Indicator Ag2.2: Natural resource related measures to strengthen subsistence agriculture in the six provinces identified and implemented (e.g. soil and land quality and access) [SOC 1.7.2] environmentally) stressed times. [ECO 3.4.2; ECO 4.2.1].

Indicator Ag2.3: Infrastructure related measures to strengthen subsistence agriculture in the six provinces identified and implemented (e.g. outer island roads, extension services, stocks of climate resilience seedlings and equipment). [ECO 3.4.1].

Indicator Ag2.4: Skills and training related measures to strengthen subsistence agriculture in the six provinces identified and implemented (e.g. climate and disaster resilient cropping training, number of farms and/or level of crop harvest per farmer in normal and stress times). [ENV 1.4.2; ENV 1.5.1].

Indicator Ag2.5: Institutional and governance related measures to subsistence agriculture in the six provinces identified and implemented (community decision- making, planning and action related to supporting agriculture SMEs at community, area, province level).

Indicator Ag2.6: Finance related measures to strengthen subsistence agriculture in the six provinces identified and implemented (e.g. agriculture SME insurance).

Indicator Ag2.7: Proportion of subsistence gardens in each of the six provinces producing food in normal and (climate, disaster and environmentally) stressed times [ECO 3.4.2; ECO 4.2.1].

Indicator Ag2.8: Changes in the level subsistence agriculture harvests in the most vulnerable communities in each of the six provinces by cultivation area and individual crop performance [ENV 1.1.3; ECO 3.4.2].

Indicator Ag2.9: Proportion of men and women engaged in subsistence agriculture in each of the six provinces in normal and climate/ disaster times, and in trade with family in urban centres.

Indicator Ag2.10: Subsistence crop turnover generated by gender and province in normal and (climate, disaster and environmentally) stressed times. [ENV 1.1.3].

Indicator Ag2.11: Percentage of subsistence gardens covered by crop insurance [no reference to insurance in NSDP].

Indicator Ag2.12: Percentage of subsistence farmers in continuing to apply traditional knowledge and access planting materials for subsistence purposes. [SOC 1.2.2].

Indicator Ag2.13: Average incidence of food poverty at the household level post-disaster (Food Poverty Line) [ENV 1.1.3].

Indicator Ag2.14: Total number of primary, secondary and tertiary schools that teach climate resilient subsistent agriculture.

Indicator Ag1.15: Number of households with access to sustainable climate-smart quality food production sufficient for daily food consumption in normal and (climate, disaster and environmentally) stressed times [ENV 1.1.1].

ENV 1.1.1 Proportion of households engaged in production of food for own consumption.

ENV 1.1.2 Up to date data on primary production (agriculture, livestock, forestry, fisheries, biosecurity) available for analysis and informed decision-making and reporting.

ENV 1.1.3 Average incidence of food poverty at the household level (Food Poverty Line).

SOC 1.2.2 Proportion of population possessing common and basic traditional production skills related to weaving, transport, housing, farming, food preparation.

ENV 1.4.2 Total number of people receiving training in food storage and preservation per year in MALFFB led, NGO or partnered initiatives. ENV 1.4.3 Establishment of land use capability mapping systems to determine which crops and farming systems are best suited to different areas.

ENV 1.3.2 Domestic food price level.

ENV 1.5.1 Proportion of producers across the productive sector that have undergone Agro-Met training.

ENV 1.5.3 Proportion of farmers involved in integrated farming practices.

ECO 3.4.1 Total annual number of agricultural extension services per capita by province.

ENV 3.1.2 Institutional strengthening of NAB, Department of Climate Change and other MoCC departments.

ECO 3.4.2 Total number of rural producer cooperatives registered by province.

ECO 4.2.1 Proportion of rural households engaged.

ECO 4.3.1 Total number of processed local products produced per annum for domestic consumption and export.

ECO 4.3.2 Ratio of processed export commodities (including coconut, kava, cocoa, coffee) to raw exports.

This Annex II is complementary to the revised and enhanced NDC, and is the result of work undertaken by the "Enhancing Vanuatu's NDC to include quantifiable adaptation targets project enabled by Deutsche Gesellschaft fr Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) and the Regional Pacific Nationally Determined Contributions Hub".

Target Wa1: By 2030, 100% of water-climate vulnerable rural communities in the six provinces have developed DWSSP and are able to address water needs in normal and (climate, disaster and environmentally) stressed times.

Indicator Wa1.1: Water-climate vulnerable rural communities for all six provinces mapped, using GIS as well as human-rights based, gender-sensitive and socially inclusive approaches and methods of assessment. [ENV 4.2.2; ECO 2.2.1; SOC 4.1.1; SOC 4.1.2; SOC 4.4.2].

Indicator Wa1.2: Natural resource related measures to addressing water climate vulnerability of rural communities in the six provinces identified and implemented (e.g. protection of natural water sources; improved wastewater disposal; water quality) [ENV 4.2.1; ECO 2.2.1; ENV 3.4.1].

Indicator Wa1.3: Infrastructure (including technology and services) related measures to address water climate vulnerability of rural communities in the six provinces identified and implemented (e.g. cyclone-proof tanks, water treatment, water technology for drought (scarcity) periods) [ECO 2.2.1; SOC 4.5.1; SOC 4.5.2].

Indicator Wa1.4: Skills related measures to address water climate vulnerability of rural communities in the six provinces identified and implemented (e.g. post-disaster water safety training) [ECO 2.2.1; ECO 2.2.2; SOC 4.1.3; SOC 4.4.1].

Indicator Wa1.5: Institutional and governance related measures to address water climate vulnerability of rural communities in the six provinces identified and implemented (e.g. community water governance; water efficiency measures; development, implementation and monitoring of community DWSSP) [ECO 2.2.1].

Indicator Wa1.6: Financing related measures to address water-climate vulnerability of rural communities in the six provinces identified and implemented (e.g. community water system insurance cover) [ECO 2.2.1; SOC 6.5.1; SOC 6.8.1; ENV 3.3.1].

Indicator Wa1.7: Proportion of water-climate vulnerable rural communities with adequate access to water supply in normal and (climate, disaster and environmentally) stressed times [ENV 4.2.1; ECO 2.2.1].

Indicator Wa1.8: Proportion of men and women with adequate access to water in each of the six provinces in normal and (climate, disaster and environmentally) stressed times [ECO 3.4.2; ECO 4.2.1].

Indicator Wa1.9: Percentage of water-climate vulnerable rural communities in the six provinces covered by water insurance.

Indicator Wa1.10: Number of water-climate vulnerable rural communities with at least 5 individuals who have been trained on climate resilient water management.

SOC 4.1.1 Proportion of government departments with gender responsive policies, legislation and programmes.

SOC 4.1.2 Number of decisions in which women participate.

SOC 4.1.3 Indicators of womens empowerment.

ENV 3.4.1 Percentage of public schools using the climate change and disaster risk reduction modules in national curricula at all levels.

ENV 4.2.1 Number of declared Water Protection Zones. TARGET: 6 Water Protection Zones declared.

ENV 4.2.2 Establishment of GIS mapping relevant to the management of forest activities (Target: By 2030 100% of forest areas of significance mapped).

SOC 4.4.1 Proportion of the activities of the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) implemented.

SOC 4.4.2 Proportion of human rights related conventions ratified.

SOC 4.5.1 Proportion of Government Offices and public facilities with ramp access or some disability friendly rating.

SOC 6.5.1 Change in annual budget going to Provinces, Municipalities towards operations/programmes (Devolution of funding authority).

SOC 6.8.1 Percentage of aid the government sector reported on the governments budget.

ENV 3.3.1 Number of support plans available to communities for coordination, planning, preparedness, response and recovery.

ECO 2.2.1 Proportion of population with reliable access to safe drinking water. TARGET: 100% by 2030.

60 VANUATUS REVISED AND ENHANCED 1ST NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION 20212030 Target Wa2: By 2030, 6 climate resilient water protection zones declared and sufficiently provides urban water supply needs in normal and (climate, disaster and environmentally) stressed times.

Indicator Wa2.1: Climate-resilient natural water sources for urban water supply needs identified and mapped using GIS [ENV 4.2.1; ENV 4.2.2].

Indicator Wa 2.2: Natural resource related measures to protect climate vulnerable urban water sources identified and implemented (e.g. reforestation of watershed) [ECO 2.2.1; ENV 4.3.1; ENV 4.6.1; ENV 4.6.2].

Indicator Wa 2.3: Infrastructure (including technology and services) related measures to protect climate vulnerable urban water sources identified and implemented (e.g. fencing of water source) [ECO 2.2.1].

Indicator Wa 2.4: Skills related measures to protect climate vulnerable urban water sources identified and implemented (e.g. watershed reforestation training) [ECO 2.2.1; ENV4.7.1].

Indicator Wa 2.5: Institutional and governance related measures to protect climate vulnerable urban water sources identified and implemented (e.g. legislating projection of watershed) [ECO 2.2.1].

Indicator Wa 2.6: Financing related measures to protect climate vulnerable urban water sources identified and implemented (e.g. reforestation of watershed) [ECO 2.2.1] disaster resilient cropping training, produce market, value chain production, etc). [ENV 1.4.2; ENV 1.5.1].

Indicator Wa2.7: Proportion of urban household with access to climate-resilient natural water source in the six provinces [ENV 4.2.1; ENV 4.2.2; ECO 2.2.1].

Indicator Wa2.8: Percentage of water-climate vulnerable urban communities in the six provinces covered by water insurance [ENV 4.2.1; ECO 2.2.1].

ENV 4.2.1 Number of declared Water Protection Zones. TARGET: 6 Water Protection Zones declared.

ENV 4.2.2 Establishment of GIS mapping relevant to the management of forest activities TARGET: By 2030 100% of forest areas of significance mapped.

ENV 4.4.2 Number of integrated coastal management plans developed and implemented.

ENV 4.6.1 Annual estimated area (square km) of reforestation and rehabilitation.

ENV 4.6.2 Proportion of licensees harvesting within their allocated quota or Proportion of licensee operations being monitored.

ENV 4.3.1 Proportion of extraction activities complying with EIA requirements.

ENV 4.7.1 Total annual outreach and awareness activities undertaken by or in partnership with the DEPC.

ECO 2.2.1 Proportion of population with reliable access to safe drinking water. TARGET: 100% by 2030 MALFFB led, NGO or partnered initiatives.

