The Holy See and the Vatican City State are committed to promoting sustainable development through environmental policies to safeguard our common home, as well as through initiatives in favour of an integral ecology education aimed at stimulating new lifestyles, based on sustainability, fraternity and the covenant between the human person and the environment.

On 24 May 2015, Pope Francis issued his Encyclical Letter Laudato Si on Care for Our Common Home,1 in which he noted that the challenge to protect our common home includes a concern to bring the whole human family together to seek a sustainable and integral development, for we know that things can change.2 He urgently appealed for a new dialogue about how we are Later, on 12 December 2020, in a Video-Message to the High Level Virtual Climate Ambition Summit, Pope Francis underscored that a strategy is necessary to reduce net emissions to zero (net- zero emission), and announced that the Holy See intended to join others in this effort by taking action at two different levels:

1. On the one hand, Vatican City State is committed to reducing net emissions to zero before 2050, intensifying efforts at environmental management that have already been in process for some years, and which make possible the rational use of natural resources such as water and energy, energy efficiency, sustainable mobility, reforestation, and the circular economy also in waste management.

2. On the other, the Holy See is committed to promoting education in integral ecology. Political and technical measures must be united with an educational process that favours a cultural model of development and sustainability based on fraternity and the alliance between human beings and the On 04 October 2022, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement entered into force for the Vatican City State, as a non-Annex I Party. By acceding to both the UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement on behalf of Vatican City State, the Holy See expressed its intention to contribute and to give its moral support to the efforts of all States to cooperate, in accordance with their common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, in an effective and appropriate response to the challenges posed by climate change to humanity and to our common home5.

State, to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and to the Paris Agreement, 4 July 2022.

Such challenges have not only environmental, but also ethical, social, economic and political responsibility to promote, through collective and joint commitment, a culture of care, which places human dignity and the common good at the centre6. By answering the question What kind of world do we want to leave to those who come after us, to children who are now growing up?7, the Holy See and the Vatican City State wish that the Convention and the Paris Agreement would help to promote a remarkable convergence on the urgent need for a change of direction, a decisive resolve to pass from the throwaway culture prevalent in our societies to a culture of care for our common home and its inhabitants, now and in the future []. Humanity possesses the wherewithal to effect this change, which calls for a genuine conversion, individual as well as communitarian, and a decisive of development, based on solidarity and on responsibility.8 These two core-values are at the basis of the implementation of both the Convention and the Paris Agreement, and will guide the efforts of the Holy See and the Vatican City State in this process.

The Holy See also ratified, in the name and on behalf of the Vatican City State, the Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer and the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer with its first four Amendments in 2008, as well as its Kigali Amendment in 2020. By communicating herewith its National Determined Contribution (NDC) as requested by Article 3 and Article 4, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement, the Vatican City State commits itself to reduce greenhouse gases to 20% below 2011 level by 2030.

The Vatican City State is the smallest sovereign State in the world, both in terms of population and territory, consisting of 0.44 square kilometers, and is an enclave surrounded by the territory of the Italian Republic.

The climate in Vatican City State is temperate, with mild, rainy winters and hot, dry summers. The average annual rainfall, around 750 mm and distributed on average over 79 days, with its minimum peak in summer and an accentuated peak in autumn.

The Vatican City State should not be confused with the Holy See. The Holy See is a sovereign in nature, it enjoys the same rights and obligations as other States and it is independent from any territorial authority or jurisdiction, although at present it exercises sovereignty over Vatican City State. Moreover, the Holy See does not exercise jurisdiction, as that term is understood in international law, over individual Catholics and institutions located outside the territory of Vatican City State. Each member of the Catholic Church is subject to the laws of the respective State in which he or she lives. Therefore, when the Holy See ratified, in the name and on behalf of the Vatican City State, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement, it undertook to observe its provisions exclusively within the Territory of the Vatican City State, as Change and to the Paris Agreement, 4 July 2022.

To date, there are 421 people residing in the territory of Vatican City State. While the number of the residents is not statistically significant, goods and services in the Vatican City State are provided mostly to a large number of non-residents. In addition to residents and citizens who reside there permanently for reasons of work, access is allowed to other people who are not citizens or do not have residence in the State. The transient population of the State is approximately 6.000 people, to which it must be added those (family members, pensioners, beneficiaries of the Health Fund and professional collaborators) who use the goods and services provided by the State.

Unlike other States, the Vatican City State does not have its own productive sector. Due to its peculiar nature, there is no gross value of the economic activities carried out within it. Its national income is essentially made up of asset management and the income generated by services provided and goods sold to residents, citizens and others.

Energy use in Vatican City State depends almost entirely on energy imports, as the State has neither fossil fuel sources, nor energy production plants with the exception of a negligible amount of energy produced from renewable sources.

The Vatican City State commits itself to reduce greenhouse gases to 20% below 2011 level by 2030.

Vatican City States NDC objectives will be benchmarked at the year 2011.

In 2011, CO2eq emissions reached a value of almost 18,94 kt (this is a provisional figure, which will be better defined through further data collection) and are broken down as shown in the Sectors tCO2eq.

n.d.

By 2030, emissions will be reduced by 20% of the 2011 figure.

The methodological approaches used to estimate and account for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and their abatement employ standard methods. More specifically, Vatican emissions were calculated using the standard methods and procedures employed by the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories as adopted by the UNFCCC and using common metrics as agreed in the Paris Agreement considering the Global Warming Potential on a 100 timescale in accordance with IPCCs 5th Assessment Report. The LULUCF sector will be accounted on a land- based approach.

The indicated reduction target will be met by the end of the year 2030 through the adoption of a strategy employing a progressive commitment over the indicated period.

Absolute economy-wide emission reduction target compared with a base year.

Geographical scope: Vatican city.

Controlled substances: all greenhouse gases not controlled by the Montreal Protocol (CO2, CH4, N2O, HFC).

Sectors involved: energy, and in particular district heating, and transportation, industrial processes and product use, land use, land use change and forestry.

The Vatican City State intends to achieve its national emission reduction targets through national measures. However, if domestic reductions prove insufficient to achieve the set objectives the use of international mechanisms will not be excluded.

4. Planning process, fairness and ambition:

The Vaticans planning processes includes the sectors mentioned in paragraph 3.1.

Several environmental management projects have been planned and implemented within the Vatican City State, each carried out in accordance with the guidelines laid out in Laudato Si. The aim of these projects has been to reduce energy consumption, optimize the management of water resources, reduce emissions of substances harmful to global warming and the ozone layer, manage waste production in a sustainable manner, and encourage recovery and recycling.10 The Encyclical Letter Laudato Si on Care for Our Common Home remains the main reference text for the Vatican City State in the implementation of its NDCs and in the promotion of the related education and awareness activities.

The principles and guidelines indicated have led and will lead the Vatican to the development of additional projects aimed at promoting:

rational use of natural resources (water and energy);

energy efficiency and the improvement of the States technological assets;

sustainable mobility;

diversification and supply of less polluting or alternative energy products for motor vehicles;

waste disposal;

development of reforestation projects.

It should be stressed, nonetheless, that margins for further improvements are minimal when considering the small size of its territory and the fact that Vatican City State has already moved decidedly in the direction of sustainability in the recent past, encouraging mitigation and increasing its energy efficiency.

Home. Five Years after Laudato Si. Rome: Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 31 May 2020, pp. 211-215.

Nevertheless, these policies will continue to advance in the coming years, focusing on the coordination of climate-relevant measures within the Vaticans current approach to energy, transport and environmental policy. This will allow for:

addressing the regulation of energy and environmental factors, increasing energy efficiency, the diversification of sources and the adoption of low environmental impact technologies;

disseminating greater education and awareness related to environmental protection and integral ecology;

valuing global and synergistic action that is both comprehensive and ambitious in favor of the climate;

accelerating the energy transition, innovation and technological development in the productive sectors with the greatest negative externalities.

Even if the States contribution to global emissions in 2022 is around 0,0000443%, the Vatican City State is committed to achieving a reduction in emissions in line with the goal of keeping global warming below 2C, as well as to pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels as foreseen in the Art. 2 of Paris Agreements.

Although the Vatican City State contributes to global emissions in an insignificant way, it considers it essential to invest in quality emission reduction projects as well as in integral ecology social benefits.

